Let's now discuss labels and selectors in details.

Labels provide a way for us to identify and group resources meaningfully.

They are key value pairs and they can be attached to many types of Kubernetes objects.

For example pods, nodes, services, deployments, replica sets.

Most of the things and objects that you create in Kubernetes, you can probably attach labels to them.

They provide metadata that help us both identify and organize this objects.

As you can see here on the right side, whenever we are creating the pod here, we are defining a series

of labels under the metadata section.

We have done that several times, so you should already be familiar with adding and managing these labels.

And we can then leverage the labels here to select them, for example, to receive traffic from a specific

service.

Labels allow us to categorize and organize the resources, and they enable sophisticated grouping and

selection mechanism.

So that's important because we can really get very fancy with labels and selectors.

Not that we have to, but the functionality is there in case we need it.

Labels are not unique in comparison to, for example, name here in the Pod metadata.

This needs to be unique within a namespace in a cluster.

Labels do not need to be unique.

So we can have, for example, two different pod definitions or two different pods having the label

app set to color API.

That is perfectly fine.

Selectors are then expressions that we use to filter Kubernetes objects based on their labels.

The selectors allow the users and Kubernetes components as well to target a specific objects that match

certain criteria.

So let's say that we are interested only in the pods that belong to the color API app.

We can then add this filtering functionality to our kubectl get pod command and it will return only

the pods that belong to or that actually have the label app set to caller API.

There are two ways we can go about selectors and labels, so let's create here a little example.

I have five pods.

They have roughly or slightly different labels.

So you can see here there is one pod which is a color API app in the dev environment front end here.

And it is a stable release.

We have then the back end here of this color API, and we have both a stable and a canary release for

the color API back end in the dev environment.

Some other example here.

E-commerce pod is also present in both the dev and the prod environment, and it is both back end and

stable.

So let's see how we could go about selecting some of these pods here by leveraging selectors in Kubernetes.

The first group of selectors we have in Kubernetes are called the equality based selectors.

And they are the older type, so they are still valid.

We can still use them and they match objects that have a specific label key value pair.

So here we can also specify multiple of them.

And when we are using the kubectl cli we can also use the different here.

So let's have a look at how this would look like in a configuration file.

We would set a selector with match labels like so or for some other types of selectors here.

Then we could also just list the labels directly here, as we saw with the service in the previous slide.

And in this case here, the selector is going to look for pods that match both these conditions.

Right.

So the app needs to be color API and the tier needs to be back end.

So in this case here it's gonna return these two pods both the stable and the canary releases.

The second type of selectors are the set based selectors.

And they can be used to match objects based on whether a label's key is part of a set of values.

So we can use operators like in, not in exists and does not exist, so the exists and does not exist.

They will actually just look at the whether the label is present altogether or not independently of

the value.

As long as the key informed here in the selector exists, then the selector will return a positive match.

Let's have a look at some examples.

The first one is a selector where we are looking at the ticker key, and we are returning all the pods

that are belonging to either the front end or the back end tiers.

As you can see the match expressions formulation here the structure.

The syntax is different than the match labels.

We are not directly specifying key value pairs.

Instead, we are passing a list of expressions, and each expression is expected to have three elements

here.

The first one is the key that we are going to look at.

So that's going to be app or tier or the environment here.

The second one is which operator to use.

Whether this is going to be in not in exists and does not exist.

And the third one are the values that we will consider for the operation.

So if we say that we are looking at the tier label and the operation is in, and then we pass a list

of values here, then this selector will return any pods that belong to or that have here set the tier

to either back end or front end.

Let's now suppose that we wish to return all the pods that are not belonging to a canary release, so

we do not have a not equal here operator that we can use, but we can emulate that by actually having

a slightly different operator here.

And we will say that the release key or the label release must not be inside of an array containing

only the canary value.

So this will return all the pods that do not belong to a canary release.

Now we could do the opposite here.

We could say release in stable, for example.

But let's say that we have different releases.

We have a stable, we have pre-release, we have Canary, we have test, we have dev.

We might have multiple types of releases here.

And if we're interested in excluding a single type or excluding a set of values, then the not in is

better than doing the other way around.

Because if we use the in here, then we would have to specify all the other variants, and we might

not either not be aware of all of them, or there might be many variants, many different possibilities

that we need to consider.

Great.

That's it for this theoretical discussion.


Let's then start practicing a little bit how we can work with labels and selectors in Kubernetes.

I'm starting once again in an empty folder here.

There is nothing inside of this folder.

I'm just going to add the files here.

Let's then open this folder in Visual Studio Code or in your IDE of preference.

And let's create a couple of files in the IDE.

Let's then simply create one file.

Here we're going to call this color API dot YAML.

And we will have the definition of two pods here.

So the API version will be v1.

Kind will be pod.

We will then add some metadata here.

And this is the actually the important part here for us.

So this pod here is going to be the color back end.

Right.

So just color back end here.

And the labels we're going to add an app label that belongs to the color API.

We're going to say that the environment here is going to be local.

So environment will be local and the tier here, the tier will be back end.

All right.

So just color API.

The color back end belongs to the back end side of the business.

And then environment here is local because we are running this in our machines.

Let's then define the specification here.

And the specification will just have a list of containers.

The name will be color back end.

And then the image here will be LM Academy forward slash color dash API 1.1.0.

Or if you wish to use your username, that's also perfectly fine.

We'll just advertise one part here that's going to be container port 80.

Right.

So this is the definition for the first pod.

I'm going to copy this here and let's paste this at the bottom.

We're going to add three dashes here to define a new resource under this pod.

And then we're going to define a color front end.

Now we don't have a custom container for color front end.

So let's just use here the traditional nginx image.

I'm just going to use here for the image nginx and the version will be 1.27.0.

Let's also change the tier here to front end.

Since this is part of the front end, the app remains the same.

That's the color API.

App and environment is going to be local.

Great.

That's all we're going to create for now, let's save this and come back to the terminal to create this

resources and see how we can specify different filters in kubectl to get only a subset of them back

at the terminal.

Let's clear our screen.

We're going to then apply the current directory here to pods will be created.

If we simply run kubectl get pods we're going to get both of them.

The both of them are container creating probably downloaded image here.

Soon they should be in a running state.

The first thing I want to show you is that we can add specific labels to the result of kubectl get pods

by using this syntax here.

So get pods and then we add a dash capital L and then without any space here the name of the label.

So if we add a Dash L app here then you will see that we get the app label added to the results of this

query.

If we add a space here, this is also working fine.

So you can use any of the these variants here.

So that's the first thing.

If you want to add another label here then we can add L for L app.

And then we can also add the tier.

And we can then compose this here as we wish to return information from our query.

Great.

Let's clear the screen and let's see how we can actually filter pods based on the labels we defined.

For us to filter by labels, we will use the dash lowercase l flag here.

So we're going to say get pod and then we'll pass dash lowercase l.

And then we can pass here the filters that we wish to use.

So we can use.

For example app is equal to caller API.

This is something that's possible to do.

We can also pass the tier here equals front end.

And so front end here.

And then we start getting only the pods that belong to the front end tier or that have the tier set

to the front end value.

We can also combine different labels here by running get pod.

And then we can either use an or approach where we're going to say tier equals to front end and then

pass another label here, another dash lowercase l.

And we'll say app is equal to caller API for example.

And this is going to return both of the pods here.

Or we can use an end condition where we pass a comma in addition to the first filter that we have.

And I'm just going to add single quotes here to make sure that this is passed correctly.

And the moment we do that, this will create an end condition.

That means this both conditions here, they need to be satisfied.

We can also use set based operators by running Gitpod.

And let's pass here the label and then we'll simply say here tier in.

And then we need to pass parentheses here and let's say front end front end.

So this will return only the pods that have the tier label set in any of the values that are within

this list.

Here we can use the not in reverse here in case we want to exclude a specific value.

And we don't know all the universal values.

So this can also be useful if we just want to exclude for example all the front end pods but return

back end or maybe workers or any other kind of pods that do not belong to the front end tier.

This can then be very helpful to narrow down the results of our search here, especially when we have

many pods running in our cluster and we want to filter it down based on identifying information.

Let's take a short break and come back in the next lecture to continue exploring labels and selectors

in more details.


Before we get started, let's just make sure that we delete all the resources we have created within

our label selectors folder here.

And I would like to go back to the IDE and create yet another file to define a deployment in the IDE.

Let's create here once again color deployment.

Let's call this color deploy dot YAML API version will be apps forward slash v1.

And then we will have a kind of deployment.

I'm just going to leverage the autocomplete here to help me with that is going to be the color API deployment.

Right.

So I'm just going to use color API like so let's remove the duplication here on the top.

You should be familiar already with all these things here.

Let's just adjust here at the bottom.

Make sure that the container definition is looking good.

LM Academy forward slash color API 1.1.0 or whatever you are using here.

We will also add a couple of additional labels.

We're going to say that the environment here is going to be local.

And then we will also say that the tier will be back end like so.

So very similar to the pods we have created in the previous lecture.

Let's also change the port here to port 80, and I believe that the container specifications are good

to go.

And I want to spend a few minutes on this selector section here, because this is something that we

will see over and over again when working with Kubernetes and defining how to select and manage different

objects under different circumstances.

So here the example is a selector for a deployment to manage pods.

But this is also applicable when we are for example establishing rules for pod placement in different

nodes.

So this pattern here you will see multiple times.

And it's good that we get used to these two match labels and the match expressions configuration.

Let's start with the match labels.

And this is very straightforward.

So the match labels here we just specify a bunch of key value pairs.

This itself is an object or a map where each key is going to be a label of our pod, and each value

is going to be the value of that label.

So basically we're just going to copy all this and place it here under match labels.

Let's remove this here like so.

And now we can also use more advanced filtering or selection operations here with the match expressions.

So the limitation of match labels is for example we cannot use in or not in operators.

We cannot define complex matching rules.

And it might be the case that we are interested in using this more advanced logic here.

One very common example that we come across often when working with infrastructure is that we have some

sort of managed label that indicates that a certain resource is managed by some other application or

third party software.

So let's add this here.

We're going to have a single.

So the match expressions key here it takes a list an array of objects instead of a single map here containing

key value pairs.

It takes a list of objects and each object has 2 or 3 properties.

Remember the key property is here.

This is going to define the label itself.

We then have operator, and the operator will define which operator we wish to use.

So this can be in.

This can be not in.

This can be exists for example.

And if the operator is exists or not exist or actually this is does not exist not not exists.

So if it is does not exist then we only need these two properties.

If the operator here is in or it is not in, then we need to specify another list here and it is a list

of values.

Right.

So values here that's going to be a list in itself.

And then we'll simply pass here a list of values.

This can be represented with a square brackets.

Or it can also be passed as dashes here indented under values.

So we could for example say here match expressions.

And we could let's say release.

and the release here is going to be stable.

We could say that the release here should not be in Canary releases, right?

So this deployment here is only going to manage stable pods.

So it's going to exclude any release here that is not Canary.

This might be a little bit tricky here, especially if we have multiple releases.

Because this could end up leading this deployment here to manage all the releases in addition to stable.

Because let's say we have another release here, maybe some development release.

And this development release is then satisfying this condition, but it's managed by another deployment.

So there could be overlap here.

It's very important that we avoid these overlaps.

Otherwise we are actually risking entering into very tricky territory here.

And Kubernetes might actually stop working as expected.

One use case that I find interesting for this match expressions is to actually use the key managed here,

and just say, hey, if this key managed exists, then we are good to go.

We are managed by a deployment.

This might not seem much, but the moment that we look at the color API here and the color backend,

we can see that the set of labels with app color, API environment and tier back end.

Here they are exactly the same as this set of labels here.

So that would be an issue if we wanted to create this pod here individually from the deployment with

this set of labels.

So one way that we could go about it and once again, I'm not saying that you have to do it, I'm just

taking this as a like a learning exploring example.

So one way for us to do that is to simply set the managed tag or the managed label here to true, for

example, or to say deployment.

It doesn't really matter the value that we add here because we are looking at the exists operator.

So as long as the tag managed or as long as sorry, as long as the label managed is present in the resource,

then this resource will match this expression here.

All right.

So let's see if we can save this.

Let's come back to the terminal and let's try to apply the entire directory here to see what's going

to happen.

Back in the terminal, we're going to simply run kubectl apply the entire directory here.

And now let's have a look at our pods.

And as you can see here we have one pod color back end that was successfully created.

And we have also one pod that was created for the deployment.

We didn't specify the number of replicas in the deployment definition.

So let's go back to the IDE and let's set this option in the IDE.

Let's set replicas here to three.

Let's save this and let's come back to the terminal.

In the terminal let's now apply this once again.

So kubectl apply let's apply the current directory.

Here we have configured our deployment.

We should now start scaling things up.

And as you can see perfect.

This is actually working as expected.

So the caller back end here even though it has the same set of labels that are present here in our deployment

pods, it's not being considered by the deployment and by the replica set here because it is not setting

the label managed to any value.

We could then visualize this here with Dash L app.

Dash L tier.

Dash L environment and environment like so.

And Dash L managed.

The moment we do that, we will see here.

Oops.

That is not very clear to see.

But so let's then just remove a few things here.

So let's remove the environment.

And I believe that this would be a little bit easier.

No.

Still need to remove one more.

So let's remove the app.

Since this is the same.

Perfect.

And that's a little bit easier for us to see.

So as you can see the color back and it is in the back end tier.

And if you have a slightly wider screen here, you can also see that all the other labels are matching.

But it is not being considered by the deployment because it does not have the managed label here set

to any value.

Now this match expression, just to wrap up this lecture here, this match expressions can be very powerful.

So we can add also other elements here.

Let's say key tier operator.

Oops.

That should be just a value.

So operator should be in and.

Oops sorry for that.

That's autocomplete.

And the values here would be let's say back end.

Right.

So now or we could also say back end and cache maybe let's say something like this.

Right.

So we are just I'm just showing you here.

I'm not saying that you should do this with deployments specifically.

As you might see, this can be very useful when we are selecting nodes to place our pods.

But this is not something we would do with a deployment.

Right.

So deployments I would recommend not keeping such set based selectors here.

I would recommend keeping them to a minimum and to simple operations, because otherwise it might be

hard to identify what's the actual scope of the deployment.

And it's much harder to avoid overlap between deployments.

So keep it simple.

Just be mindful that we can get very powerful with this match expressions configuration option here.

And that's what I wanted to present and discuss in this lecture.

Let's take a short break and come back in the next lecture.



Let's briefly discuss annotations and how we can leverage them in our Kubernetes resources.

Annotations are a great way for us to add useful information and configuration to resources.

So on the right here we have one example of how we can add annotations to configure an ingress that

is backed by an nginx ingress controller.

Now, we haven't discussed Ingresses.

We haven't discussed nginx ingress controllers.

So I don't expect you to know exactly what these annotations are actually doing.

But the bottom line here is that they are being used to configure a certain ingress to configure the

behavior of our resource.

So annotations are key value pairs attached to Kubernetes objects, just like labels, don't you think?

Key value pairs here.

But unlike labels, annotations are not supposed to store identifying metadata, and they are often

used by tools or by the Kubernetes system itself to configure certain services or to perform other activities.

There are some common some common use cases around it.

So first of all, tool specific metadata and configuration.

That's what we have here on the right.

So external tools such as monitoring systems or agents for logging systems may leverage annotations

to attach custom data to resources.

Let's say for example, that we whenever we are logging something, we wish to add some additional data

here to the resources.

We might also add it in the annotations section.

Annotations can also be used to configure ingress controllers.

That's exactly what we are doing here on the right.

And you can see here that we are configuring SSL redirection.

And we are forcing that HTTP traffic is redirected to Https traffic.

So for example we can define path rewrites, custom load balancing and other things.

Now this depends on how the ingress controllers, how the application here is actually being developed

and how we can how it expects us to use annotations.

So this is very application or system specific.

Another use case is that we might want to store, build and version information.

So annotations can be used to store metadata such as the timestamps of the builds.

The version numbers.

If we wish to store the commit hash from git so that we can quickly retrieve which exact commit led

to this resource in a certain current state, and we can also use this for runtime configuration for

operators.

So some certain Kubernetes operators or controllers, they can use annotations to customize their runtime

behavior for specific resources.

The structure of annotations is as follows.

So we can have a prefix which must be a DNS valid DNS subdomain here.

So you can see this really looks like a DNS subdomain.

And this is expected.

This is necessary for automated system components either from the Kubernetes side or as from from other

third party providers, which are adding annotations to the objects that are created by us.

So if automated systems are adding annotations behind the scenes, then they are expected to provide

such a prefix.

If the prefix is omitted, then the key here is actually presumed to be from a private user, namely

from us, right?

So we can add ourselves annotations however we want.

But if automated systems are adding annotations, then they are expected to have this prefix in addition

to the prefix.

Then annotations should also have a name that needs to be less than 63 characters and contain only this

characters here.

All right, so that's it for annotations.

You probably come across annotations much more often as you start working with other automated systems.

And just for you to keep in mind that if you see some documentation around, hey, set annotations to

these and that value to actually configure how the certain object here is working, then this is also

common practice in Kubernetes.



Help us improve isolation for groups of resources.

But before we actually enter into the discussion around namespaces, let's understand how they can be

helpful.

So let's imagine we have a Kubernetes cluster here.

And we have a couple of applications deployed.

We have an e-commerce back end deployed a payment back end deployed.

We have some database statefulsets here up and running with a couple of pods.

We have a few more services ingresses jobs and whatnot in our cluster.

Now we decide that we actually want to deploy this into another environment.

So basically we have a dev environment here.

And then we also deploy a prod environment, basically roughly the same thing, except that there are

a few more constraints here around which versions, which images are actually deployed to prod.

But without namespaces, everything is really living under the same house.

Think about it as a big house without rooms, just one big room with a lot of different families living

together here.

And of course, the Kubernetes cluster is running on some hardware.

So we have CPU and we have memory constraints here.

And these are the constraints of the hardware itself where Kubernetes is running.

Now let's try to extrapolate our imagination a little bit.

And what happens when one of the families, when one of the services here really starts to grow and

consume a lot of resources.

So now the service is really consuming almost all of the CPU and all of the memory.

And if there is no separation, if there are no boundaries here to the service, then this will actually

start impacting unrelated pods, unrelated applications.

This is going to start killing pods here, or might start killing pods from other deployments, from

other stateful sets from other environments here, including the production environment.

So what would happen if the entire payment back end service here is down and there is no way to pay

anything anymore?

So in the worst case scenario, one of these little services here, going astray and starting consuming

a lot of resources can lead to the whole cluster really blowing up and having a lot of unintended and

very harmful consequences.

So isolating parts of our application or different environments.

Logically, it does make sense because it gives us a very good layer of protection here for other resources

inside of the cluster.

So namespaces provide a way for us to divide cluster resources between multiple users, multiple teams,

or multiple applications, or even multiple environments.

It really depends on which dimension you want to use here.

It allows us for resource isolation or it allows for resource isolation.

And it helps us organize workloads in large Kubernetes cluster.

So they enable logical isolation of resources within the same physical cluster.

That means we don't really need to create an entire new cluster and keep it separate from one another.

We can use namespaces to achieve this logical isolation.

Kubernetes ships normally with four initial namespaces the default namespace, which is where everything

is launched Whenever we don't specify a namespace, we then have the kube system namespace, which is

reserved for Kubernetes resources themselves and the Kubernetes software running in the cluster.

We have the kube public namespace, which is intended for publicly available resources that any user

could access.

And then we have the kube node lease namespace, which serves purposes of managing leases, which are

then needed by the Kubelet to actually communicate the node health, so that the Kubernetes system can

get feedback from the Kubelet regarding whether a node is available and healthy or not.

Some common use cases for namespaces.

Whenever we have multi-tenant clusters with multiple teams, we can use namespaces to give each team

the ability to take care of their applications and keep their resources logically separated.

We can also use namespaces for environment separation.

So if you want to ensure that the dev namespace here, as we have on the on the right, is separated

from staging and separated from production, we can use namespaces for that, we can also apply different

policies and quotas to each of these namespaces here so we can manage access and resource utilization

separately.

So resource quotas.

Once again here if we wish to limit the CPU, the memory and the number of resources that a namespace

can use, then resource quotas is a good way coupled together with namespaces.

And this prevents one team or environment from monopolizing cluster resources, for example.

Last but not least, security and access control is another important thing.

Let's say that we want to limit which user or service account can access specific resources within the

cluster.

We can use namespaces.

And let's say that to access the production resources here, you would need to have a certain level

of permissions which is different or which is probably more strict than the permissions necessary to

access the dev namespace.

This ensures that users or services can only access resources within their allowed namespaces, and

it's a very common use case for leveraging namespaces to restrict access to certain cluster resources.

Good.

So a few words on using namespaces.

We're going to practice a lot of this later on.

But we must inform in which namespace we wish to create our resources.

So whenever we are using kubectl, for example, or whenever we are creating our pod or our resource

definition files, we need to specify the namespace except if we wish to deploy them on the default

namespace.

Then we don't need to specify, but in any other case, we need to specify in which namespace we wish

to create the resources.

We can also set a current namespace for all kubectl commands, or we can pass it explicitly in each

command.

And last but not least service communication if it is reaching across namespaces.

So let's say that some service here from the staging namespace, or let's say actually that a pod from

a staging namespace wants to talk to a service in the dev namespace.

Then we would have to use the fully qualified domain name here of the service instead of just the service

name.

One example here would be to, let's say, to have a fourth name space in addition to dev staging and

production, which would be, let's say, a monitoring namespace where we are deploying a single solution

to our whole Kubernetes cluster.

And we want our pods to talk from all these three namespaces here to the monitoring namespace.

Then if there is any service there, we would need to use the fully qualified domain name.

We're going to see how this fully qualified domain name looks like in the practical sessions.

So don't worry about it.

If this is not 100% clear, it's going to be in just a couple of lectures.

Great.

Now a few best practices around namespaces.

First of all, don't overuse them just because they are there.

It doesn't mean that you need to create a namespace for every single little thing.

So consider whether there is a solid case for logically isolating cluster resources, either limiting

the the physical resources that they should be able to consume, or protecting the resources via role

based access control.

Then if there is a solid case.

By all means, go ahead with it.

But just don't overuse name spaces just because they are there.

As I already mentioned, it's good practice to combine name spaces with role based access control to

improve security around resources deployed in each namespace, and if we also wish to limit the resources

a namespace can use, then we should by all means use resource quotas, and this is a best practice

to prevent a namespace from consuming all the available cluster resources.

Last but not least, use meaningful dimensions to define the namespaces.

So normally or.

Several common choices include as already mentioned, teams, applications, environments.

So pick something that makes sense from the overall team and environment setup for your project, so

that others working on it can also intuitively understand the structure of your namespaces and how to

work with them.

Great, that's it for this theoretical discussion.



Namespaces are a great way for us to isolate our resources within the cluster and create logical partitions.

So let's start exploring how we can work with them.

Namespaces are Kubernetes objects.

That means we can create them using declarative files.

We can also create them via the kubectl cli.

Let's follow the declarative style.

So let's just create a new file.

Here we're going to call this dev ns dot YAML.

And this namespace here has one of the simplest declarative or one of the simplest configurations.

So once again API version is there.

That's going to be v1.

The kind here is there that's going to be namespace kind is namespace like so namespace.

And the namespace object has no spec section.

It has a metadata section which has then a name that's going to define the name of the namespace.

And we can set this to whatever we want.

Let's save this here.

So as you can see very simple here.

Let's save this.

Let's come to the IDE and let's apply the changes in the IDE.

Make sure you are inside of whatever folder you created the namespace file.

And we can once again kubectl apply dash f with the current directory.

And we can see that the namespace dev was created.

If you now run kubectl get namespace, this is going to return all the namespaces that we have in our

cluster.

And as you can see, in addition to the one we have just created, there are four namespaces that are

shipped here by Kubernetes.

The default one kube node, lease, cube public and cube system.

Once we run any commands here with for example kubectl get pods, we will see that it returns no resources

found in the default namespace.

We can specify the namespace for this kind of commands here.

So actually for most of the commands in kubectl, by simply passing the dash n or the dash dash namespace

flag here and then passing the value of the namespace so we can see the pods that are running in the

kube system namespace.

And as you can see, there are quite a few pods here.

This is all Kubernetes software.

Kube scheduler is here.

The kube proxy is here, the controller manager the API server, the core DNS, the etcd store.

So as you can see there are lots of pods here that are running and delivering most of the functionality

of the Kubernetes system.

So let's now create a new pod inside of our dev namespace in the IDE.

Let's create a new file here.

Once again, let's just continue with our color API.

I'm not going to do anything fancy here, so let's just directly go for a kind of pod that's going to

provide a lot of autocompletion for us here.

Let's replace my app with just color API like.

So let's replace all of them.

Image.

Once again LM Academy forward slash color API 1.1.0.

Let's remove the resources and let's set the port of our container to port 80 like so.

For us to create a resource within a namespace, we need to pass the namespace option here under the

metadata.

So let's pass namespace here dev.

And let's save this.

Let's now come back to the terminal and apply this file in the terminal.

Let's just clear the screen.

Let's run kubectl apply once again.

And we'll see that the pod was created.

Now if we run kubectl get pod once again the pod is not running in the default namespace.

Therefore it is not returned here.

So we can just pass the dev namespace and we can confirm that our pod is up and running.

It might be very cumbersome here to pass a specific namespace with every command.

Let's say that then we want to actually describe the pod.

So let's describe our pod here for example color API.

And if we forget to pass the namespace dash n or dash dash namespace here, then we get an answer like

oops, there is no color API pod.

And that's because it is looking at the default namespace whenever we issue the command.

So we'll have to come here and add the namespace dev once again.

And then we get the response.

Now this can be very annoying very quickly if you are working with either different namespaces or if

all your pods are inside of one namespace that is not the default, then you need to keep specifying

that.

Of course, we can set the namespace for all our commands from now onwards by updating the context under

which the kube kernel is operating.

So for that the command is kubectl config set context.

And then we're going to take the current context.

So we could actually just have a look here.

So kube config current context like so I believe that this will give us back our current context.

So now we can use the set context here to set properties of our context.

We're going to pass the current flag here to take into account our current context which is minikube.

And then we will set here the namespace will be equal to dev.

Now this is going to set the namespace dev for our current context, which means that any kubectl command

that we execute from now onwards will operate under the dev namespace.

So kubectl get pods that's going to return the pods under the dev namespace.

And now if we wish to describe a pod describe pod color API.

We don't need to worry anymore about always passing the namespace.

Now this can be very good, right?

But it can also be tricky.

So just make sure that you keep in mind which namespace you are operating under, because it could be

very easily the case here.

Let's say that we set our.

So we use kube config set context namespaces prod.

And I was like okay the namespace pod here doesn't really exist right now right.

So we don't have it here.

Nothing is going to work.

But let's say that we set this and we are operating on Pod doing some get and describe here kubectl

get or cubical to describe and so on and so forth.

And then suddenly out of nowhere, we just decide to delete something because we think, okay, yeah,

I am done testing some stuff on dev.

Let's now just delete our deployment here.

And that's a very critical deployment, right.

It's a very critical deployment here.

And we run this command thinking that we are in the dev namespace.

But because we have forgotten to set the context, for example, we end up deleting stuff in prod and

then well you know the consequences.

Everything goes down.

We have a bunch of things to fix and hopefully we still have a job tomorrow.

Right?

So it's like, be very careful when you set this configuration like this and make sure that you are

operating under the namespace that you intend to whenever you are running operations, particularly

destructive operations such as kube, cuddle, delete, we can view which context we are operating under

by running kubectl config view like so.

And that's going to return a bunch of stuff here.

But let's just scroll up a little bit.

You will see here that there is actually quite a lot of information.

So the cube cuddle can manage multiple clusters to begin with.

Right.

So first of all you if you are working with multiple clusters, maybe you have some cluster from work

or different clusters, ideally even different clusters for prod and non-prod let's say.

So they are completely separate.

Then you might have all of them listed here.

So you might have a bunch of clusters listed under cluster.

And then we might also have a bunch of contexts listed under the contexts key.

What's important here for us is to have a look at the current context.

So that's minikube here.

And we take this value and we map this value here to the context that has the corresponding name.

So the name here is minikube.

This matches the current context.

And then we go into this object here.

And we get the namespace.

And then we can see that this is the prod namespace.

All right.

So let's just change this once again.

We're going to set our context.

So config set context current namespace is going to be dev once again.

And then we are good to go.

We can confirm that we have pods running here by running kubectl get pods like so.

And let's now explore what happens when we delete a namespace.

So let's set our context namespace to default.

Back here we can confirm that we get no pods.

And actually just before we delete stuff, let me just show you one thing here.

You can let's clear the console.

You can also get resources for certain commands here across all namespaces.

You should add a dash capital letter A here, or uppercase A or a dash dash all dash namespaces.

And this is going to return all the pods across all the namespaces that we have here in our cluster.

This might be useful in case you just want to identify actually which namespace a certain pod is running

on.

So let's suppose here that you have a certain pod that you know the name of the pod, but you don't

know the actual namespace where that pod is.

You might use the all namespaces or the dash a like so to get a list of all the pods.

And then you can identify ah, okay.

The pod is actually under the dev namespace.

Good.

Let's then set here our context to dev and then continue with our operations.

Right.

So I just cancel this operation here.

Just make sure to cancel not to run this.

And you can confirm that we still have here.

Let's have a look kubectl config or if you actually run it.

So just undo it by running kubectl config set context namespace default.

And then we are good to go.

All right.

Deleting a namespace.

So kubectl delete dash f and then let's pass the current directory here or actually no, no, let's

let's not pass the current directory.

Let's pass just the dev dash and s here.

So dev namespace dot YAML.

And I'm passing only this file here because we have multiple files inside of our directory.

We also have a color API pod.

And I want to show you what happens with this pod here when we delete the namespace.

So I'm just going to run kubectl delete f dev and s dot YAML.

And this is going to delete the namespace.

Now what's your guess what's going to happen with the pod.

Well if you guess that the pod is gonna stay there forever, that is not really what's going to happen.

And if you guess that the pod is going to be gone, well then congratulations, the pod is just gone.

So if we run our kubectl get pods, we will see no pods on the default namespace.

That's fine, but if we add the dash a here, our pod, our color API pod is gone forever.

If you have resources running inside of a namespace and you delete that namespace, then the resources

will be deleted.

So be extremely careful about deleting namespaces.

You should also use security role based access control to really limit who can delete namespaces inside

of your cluster.

Actually, who can manage namespaces altogether inside of a cluster.

But this can be a very, very destructive operation.

Be very careful about it.

All right.

So that's it for our initial discussion around namespaces.

Hopefully it is more clear now how to work with them both in the configuration side.

How do we create a namespace declaring it in YAML as well as in the kubectl side?

How we can use namespaces by either setting the current context here to be restricted to a specific

namespace, or by passing this namespace as part of our commands.



Let's now explore how we can communicate to services that are living in another namespace in our cluster.

Up until now, we have a dev namespace and we have our caller API pod living also inside of this dev

namespace.

Let's create a service to expose this pod.

Here we're going to use once again just the definition file here.

So API version is going to be v1.

Kind will be service.

And then let's just remove here a little bit of the duplication as always.

And now we can set the port.

Let's set the port to 80 here.

The target port will also be 80.

We're just going to leave this as it is as a cluster IP by not specifying any type here.

Actually we can specify the type.

Let's just specify here type cluster IP with a capital P here like so.

And then the selector is just going to be the name here.

Let's see we have name.

So let's change the name here to app instead of name.

And we're just going to use here your app caller API?

And let's also set the name here.

And we do need to also set the namespace at this resource level.

Right.

So if we do not specify the namespace under metadata here, this will be created in the default namespace.

So let's just add here namespace dev and then the caller API service like so.

So I'm just going to add a service here.

The name is correct labels.

Here we can also add these labels to our service.

And we have the specification selector is going to be App Caller API.

That's going to match the label here and the ports as defined here.

In addition to that I also want to create another pod here that's going to be our traffic generator

dot YAML.

I'm just going to copy the definition from this pod here.

Let's copy this.

Let's paste it here.

And now let's not define that's not set the namespace to dev so that this gets deployed in the default

namespace.

So the name here I'm just going to say traffic generator app traffic Generator.

And then we can also add this value here.

So let's copy paste it here.

And then we'll also paste it here.

And we need to configure this with a couple of arguments that are two arguments.

The first one is the endpoint we want to hit.

And the second one is the interval the interval here we're just going to set let's say to one second

instead of 0.5.

And now here for the endpoint that we wish to hit we cannot just use the name of the service.

The name of the service is a valid identifier for DNS resolution and for communication if and only if

the traffic is coming from within the same namespace.

If we are communicating with A or from a different namespace, then we need to use what's called a fully

qualified domain name, and that is composed of the following pieces of information.

So I'm just going to write it here.

That's going to be the service name dot.

The namespace dot svc dot cluster dot local.

And so it's a little bit longer than just using the service name.

So all we have to do here now is to add this piece of information here.

And the namespace is going to be dev instead of whatever value we had there.

And this is all we need to set here for the communication to take place between our traffic generator

and the caller API pod, or actually the caller API service, which then will redirect the traffic to

the caller API pod.

Great.

Let's save this here.

And let's now come back to the terminal and apply the entire directory and see if the logs from our

traffic generator will be correctly showing the message.

And actually here there are a few two things.

Just one second before we go.

There are two things here.

The first one is we need to use version 1.0.0 for the traffic generator.

And here we would like to hit the forward slash API endpoint of our pods.

So let's just add forward slash API here so that we get the proper parsed message here in text format.

Great.

Let's save this.

Come back here to the IDE.

Let's then apply this directory here.

The entire directory.

And as you can see here, if you try to apply everything, Kubernetes is not going to be smart enough

to identify the dependency.

It's basically saying that hey the namespace dev doesn't exist yet.

So if we were to just wait a few minutes or actually just a few milliseconds here and we just get the

namespace, make sure that the dev namespace is here.

And now we apply this once again, we can confirm that our pods and services will be created.

So for that, if there is some dependency here, you might have to apply specific files beforehand.

But everything should be looking good.

So let's now get our pods.

The traffic generator is the only one that's running in our default namespace.

We can then get pod and service at the namespace dev, so we can confirm that we get both the pod and

the service here up and running.

We can also get multiple resources or multiple object types here.

As you can see, this might be useful whenever you are debugging something that involves more than one

type of resource, or more than one type of object.

Let's now just get the logs of our traffic generator here.

And the moment we do that, as you can see, perfect.

We get the log.

So as you can see here, first we didn't get any logs because the traffic generator was created.

The traffic generator pod was created.

But we had that error with the color API pod and with the service.

And then after we fix that and created it, then we start getting the logs here.

So that's the only thing I wanted to show you.

We can also delete everything here from our directory.

So that's going to just delete everything.

And just keep in mind that whenever you want to reach out to a service that is exposed in a different

namespace, then you would have to use its fully qualified domain name to reach to that service, instead

of just using the individual service name.

Perfect.
























Whenever we want to make sure that our pods and whatever objects we're creating with Kubernetes have

enough resources available for them to run smoothly.

Resource quotas, requests and limits.

They allow us to define how much CPU, memory, and storage the objects might use.

Now these are basically two sides of the same coins.

They are used to ensure that our resources are distributed fairly among applications, and they can

also prevent a single application or namespace from consuming excessive resources from the nodes, and

potentially leading to resource starvation and then pods being killed or slowed down.

So there are two sides of the same coin.

Basically resource quotas.

They are policies applied at the namespace level, and they define hard limits on the number of resources

such as CPU, memory and object counts.

Here, for example, pods that can be consumed by all objects within that namespace.

On the flip side of that, whenever we want to run a pod, for example, inside a namespace that has

a resource quota set, we then need to define requests and limits for the resources consumed by that

pod.

They are defined at the container level within the pods.

So if we have multiple containers within a same pod, we would need to define requests and limits on

a container basis.

And they specify how much of each resource a container needs requests.

They focus on the minimum amount of CPU or memory a container should always have available after scheduling

and the limits.

They specify the maximum amount of CPU or memory that a container is allowed to use.

A resource quota definition looks something like this.

So let's say we have two namespaces.

One is the dev namespace and the other one is the prod namespace.

And then we'll create a resource quota object per namespace.

We can define a name for the resource quota, and we can bind this resource quota to a specific namespace.

We can then specify here in the spec session, how much are the hard limits for the requests CPU and

requests memory and limits CPU and limits memory.

These are just examples that are also other configuration options, and you can set these limits for

other settings as well.

On the right side here we have one example of how we could set the prod resource quota.

For example, to make sure that the prod namespace has six times more resources available than the dev

namespace.

This would ensure that whatever pods or objects are running inside of our prod namespace, they would

have all these resources available to them.

And if pods within the dev namespace start to consume too much, this would not impact the prod namespace.

Let's then have a look at how the scheduling would happen here.

So let's say that we have a pod which we wish to deploy on the dev namespace.

We look at the request CPU memory limits as well, and we can see that since there are no pods scheduled,

well, we do have 500 millis here of CPU available.

Here we are specifying with the extension M here.

So notice the extension M and that's basically the smallest unit.

It stands for millicores here.

And we could also use fractional or decimal values if we were not specifying the m suffix here.

But I do find it good to specify m, especially if you are using less than one vcpu if you're also using

one or more, as long as it doesn't get really confusing.

If you start using 100 vcpu, then it might be hard to visualize using M here.

However, for our use case here, I just want to show you that this is possible.

So 500 millis are available here.

We have 1000 available.

That's the first pod one GB byte of memory request is also available.

We have two here, and then we also have available 1000 minutes for the limits and two GB bytes for

memory.

So it's all good.

This pod gets scheduled and starts running and then we move to the next one also in the namespace dev.

But now let's say we just want 200,000,512 maybe bytes 400ml of limits and one GB byte.

This is all good.

So if we add up these two lines here, we'll get 700ml.

This is still under the 1000 of requests.

We would get 1.5 GB bytes here.

That's also below the two GB bytes.

And the same thing for the limits for both CPU and memory.

Now let's say that a third pod comes, and this pod actually would like a 400ml of request vcpu.

However, whenever we add all these three values here, we would go over the request CPU quota that

we have specified in our resource quota.

As a consequence, this pod does not get scheduled in this namespace.

It will be shown in a state of pending.

Same thing if we go over limits.

So let's say here we have three GB bytes already reserved for these two pods, and our limit for memory

is four GB bytes.

If a new byte comes here that wishes to use two GB bytes, or wishes to set two GB bytes for limits

here, then this is not going to be allowed and the pod once again will not be successfully scheduled.

It's important to highlight that if the resource quotas are set for namespaces, then pods must specify

requests and limits, otherwise Kubernetes might not work correctly.

All right, there is a little bit of math involved here, but it's nothing really fancy.

It's just making sure that there are enough resources in our namespaces, as defined by the resource

quota, so that the pods can be scheduled and run successfully.

Also, of course, the estimates here, they must or they should.

Let's not say must, but they should be done based on some real data.

Maybe you do a little bit of stress testing and some expectations around the load, how much load your

pod is expected to handle, how many requests and maybe how much work it's supposed to do.

And then based on that, and based on some synthetic traffic, you could then monitor how much CPU and

memory is necessary, and then you add a little bit of buffer just in case.

And you could come up with these values, some approximations.

So this doesn't need to be an exact very exact science here.

But the recommendation is also not that you set these things blindly because this might actually impact

other pods.

Right.

So if we start setting values here that end up being too high, if we have many pods running, then

we might be reserving resources that we don't actually need, and then we will end up hitting resource

quota bounds here.

And new pods will not be able to be scheduled.

Awesome.


Let's now discuss resource quotas.

I'm starting once again in an empty directory here, just so that we keep all the files separated.

Let's create a couple of namespaces to begin with.

So we're going to start with dev namespace here.

Very similar to what we already did in the previous lecture.

If you wish to copy let me just close this.

If you wish to copy the file from the previous lecture, that's also perfectly fine.

Or even if you wish to continue working on the previous directory.

I think that's also perfectly fine.

You might just have to be a little bit careful about the the pods and other things that we have there,

but the files here are going to be very similar.

So let's create one dev and one prod namespace.

And here we are just going to use the API version.

That's V1 kind is going to be namespace.

So nothing really new here.

Metadata here.

Just going to have the name and the name in this one it's going to be prod.

So I'm in the prod file.

Just make sure that you are in the correct file here.

Let's use the same names.

And now let's create a resource quota.

So we could create a new file here for resource quota.

But I do find that this is one of those cases where having multiple resources in the same file actually

makes sense, because I would always like to create a namespace with resource quotas.

There is hardly ever a case where I would like to create a namespace without resource quotas, and then

it would just basically be two files here instead of one.

So I'm just going to have everything in one file here.

The API version for resource resource quotas is also v1 and the kind here.

So let's add kind.

That's resource quota.

And then we have here a metadata and some metadata here.

Now we need to specify the namespace.

So namespace will be dev.

And the name here we can say dev dash quota like so.

And we can set the specifications here.

Let's set spec hard limits.

And what we would like to set here is let's just set requests dot CPU and that's going to be set to

one.

This is the equivalent of a thousand milli cores right.

So a thousand milli like so if you are using very small decimal numbers like 0.02 for example, then

it might be easier to visualize if you have 20 milli like so if you are using two big numbers.

So for example 100 and then you have here 100,000 milli, that is not as easy to see, right.

It just at once here.

It might might be confused with 10,000 or with a million.

So depending on the unit here you can decide which one makes it more readable.

I'm just going to go with the normal or with the with the integer.

Here we can also set request.

So let's set requests here request dot memory.

And for the memory we're just going to use let's say one GB byte.

We then would have limits dot CPU and limits dot CPU.

We're going to set, let's say to two and then limits dot memory.

We will also set to two GB bytes.

Now it's important to highlight that these are not the only types of quotas that we can set.

We have other things like we could set a maximum number of pods.

For example, let's say I don't want to run more than four pods on this namespace, but I hardly ever

find this is actually a good type of limit, because we can still have pods that are consuming a lot

of resources, or we might end up actually needing more pods here, even though there are.

Or maybe we can hit this limit even though there are still resources available.

So I normally tend to focus primarily on the resources here and not on hard numbers for pods, services

and so on and so forth.

So let's also copy this and let's create a resource quota here for pod for prod.

Sorry, not for pod for prod.

And the difference is that it's going to be prod and that's going to be the prod quota.

And here we're going to create in the request CPU.

That's going to be twice as much.

And it's also going to be twice as much.

And for the limited CPU that's also going to be twice and twice.

So that's looking good.

We can also confirm that this is actually so the sum here limits the memory and the limits dot memory

here.

That's six GB bytes.

That is less than what is allocated by default by minikube.

Whenever we create our cluster we can go above the limit okay.

So like just just to make it very clear, these are nothing but requests and like theoretical values,

if we request more CPU and more memory than what is actually available in our cluster, then there will

be a problem whenever the pods actually want to use those resources.

But Kubernetes is not going to stop us from setting requests that are above our actual physical resources.

And the example here is that we have limits CPU set to two for our dev namespace, and limits CPU set

to four for our prod namespace.

That means that in total we could theoretically reach a limit of six CPUs.

However, by default, minikube uses or creates a node with two vCPUs.

That means that if the containers if all the pods were to use all the resources that they theoretically

can, then we would actually run into resource contention.

So this is something else that you should keep in mind.

This also refers to how much hardware is available to you.

In our case here I'm just making you aware.

But again, like setting very small limits here, that would also be something that you wouldn't come

across in reality.

So I'm just using the values here that we can better visualize.

We will also use primarily the dev namespace since all these resources here, they are covered by the

hardware quote unquote like virtual hardware that is provisioned by minikube.

So let's save this.

Let's come to the terminal.

And in the terminal we can now run kubectl apply for the current files here.

And we can now confirm that we have our namespaces.

And if we were to now get our resource quota.

Now if we pass it like so we are not going to get anything here.

For the default namespace we don't have anything.

But if we actually retrieve this for all the namespaces, then we can confirm that we actually get the

values here.

We can also describe this.

We can say kubectl describe resource quota and then pass the name here.

And we need to pass the namespace.

Once again that's dev.

We will also get a more or a clearer comparison here about how much is used and what is the hard limit

that we set.

All right I want to start creating the pods here with some resource requests and limits.

But before that, let's take a short break.

I think that we have discussed quite a few important things here.


Let's now start creating here our pods to consume some of this quota in our dev namespace.

So let's come back to the IDE.

And within the same folder let's just create a new file here called API pod like so dot YAML.

And we're going to create that's going to be API version.

That's getting a little bit repetitive.

But don't worry about it.

It's just because we're creating lots of new resources.

That's going to be our pod color API here.

Let's just use all the same things here.

The label we're going to use app instead of name.

And the container here.

Now we're going to set LM Academy forward slash color dash API 1.1.0.

We're just going to advertise here port 80 like so.

As you can see here this already comes prefilled.

So in the resources section let me just erase this here.

So in the resources section we can set here a requests as well as limits.

Right.

So we also have we can set it like so CPU so CPU.

Make sure the indentation here is correct.

So the CPU here we have and then we also have memory.

And then we have here for limits CPU and memory like so.

So let's say that for request here we would like 200 so 200 milli cores.

And for memory here I believe that let's say um 256MB.

And then for limits you're going to put half a core.

So 500 Millicores.

And for memory I'm just going to put 512 Mebibytes.

Right.

So here let's save this.

And let's now apply and confirm that this pod can actually be scheduled.

It will come to a running state.

But before we do that, let's not forget that we need to launch this in the dev namespace, right.

So let's save this.

Let's come back to the terminal and let's run kubectl apply dash f clear the console.

Let's apply this here.

The pod has been created.

So kubectl get pod namespace dev.

And we can confirm that the pod is up and running.

If we were to describe here kubectl describe pod color API namespace dev.

We get the description as well as the resources here that are set at the container level.

Very important here.

The resources once again are set at the container level.

That means if we have more containers here, then all of them have to have the available resources so

that the pod can successfully start.

Great.

Let's scroll down here.

Let's clear the console.

And now let's inspect what happens once.

We want to create a pod that consumes more resources than what is available.

So in our file here let's just copy and paste the color API pod.

And now we're going to say some heavy API pod like so.

And then we're going to say heavy API instead of color API.

We're just going to copy this find and replace here by heavy API.

Let's replace all of them except for the image.

We're just going to use the color API once again.

So here the image itself is independent of the resource requests and limits.

That means we can use a very lightweight image here.

And we can still blow up all the requests and limits here if we wish to do so.

So if we just put if we were to just put one here in our CPU and let's say that we want to request one

GB byte and the limits would be two and that'll be two GB bytes.

And we want to try to schedule this pod because the sum of CPU from the heavy pod and the color API

pod and the color pod, they would exceed whatever we have here in our spec.

Hard for the resource quota, then this pod here will not be allowed to be created.

It will not run successfully.

So let's save this.

Let's come back to the terminal and let's run once again kubectl apply f like so.

And as you can see here we get already the error.

It simply says forbidden.

So there was an error here.

If we look at the message here we have that pod is forbidden because it exceeds the quota.

The image here is also printed.

Or the message here also includes how much is actually already used and how much I believe was requested.

Yes, here.

So it's not that easy to see.

So requested, used and limited, right?

It's printing how much we asked for, how much is already being used and what the limits are now.

As you can see, this is an error from the server.

So basically the request went to the server.

Kubernetes tried to create and schedule the pod and then it got the error back from the server.

So the server Kubernetes sent an error.

And this is printed on the CLI.

So this is not something that comes from the client side.

It's a server side error.

All right so before we proceed here let's just make sure that we delete everything that we have created

so that we delete all the pods.

We also get an error here because the pod actually doesn't exist.

It was never created.

Let's then come back to the IDE and just delete this heavy API pod back in the IDE.

Let's just delete this file here so that we don't have this faulty pod up and running or being created

whenever we apply the entire directory.

That's a great moment for us to take a short break.

And let's come back to the next lecture to also discuss one very common scenario that we might end up

exhausting the resources of our namespace and how we could go about it.


In this lecture, I would like to discuss one common trap that we might run into that might and might

exhaust the resources and that you should be aware of.

So here we are deploying only pods, right.

That's a single pod here.

However let's change this.

Let's now create a color API deployment.

So instead of just a single pod I wish to create a deployment here I'm going to copy the definition

of the pod because I will specify this also under the spec section.

But let's change this to APS forward slash v1.

The kind will be deployment.

The metadata here name is going to be color API deployment.

The namespace will be dev the labels.

Your app is going to be color API the spec we're going to have replicas.

We're just going to create here.

Let's set a number five for example.

And then here we will have template.

And the template will then have its metadata.

Metadata.

And I'm just going to copy here once again from our pod.

We don't need to specify the metadata or the namespace under the template metadata.

Right.

So this will already be defined here by the the namespace of the deployment.

We also don't need to specify the name that's going to be set by the deployment.

And then we have here spec.

And then we're going to set the containers here like so.

Now instead of using the 1.1.0 let's just use the 1.0.0 here so that we can also try to create a rollout

for this deployment.

Last but not least, after we have created a template, we also need to set a selector here.

And the selector we're just going to look at app color API like so right.

So I believe that this is all we need to do.

And let's reduce here a little bit the requests.

Let's put this.

So 200 is good here 256 might be a little bit too much.

So maybe we can actually instead of reducing this here.

Let's just change this replicas to four instead of five, so that we make sure here that our resources

are within the boundaries of the dev namespace.

And why do I say that?

Because when we look at dev we should have one CPU, one GB byte, two CPUs, and two GB bytes for limits.

When we look at the deployment, that's one thing we need to keep in mind.

We're going to create four pods.

Each pod will create its own requests and limits here.

That means we should take these values and multiply by four.

It's going to be 800 millicores that's going to be one GB byte.

That's going to be two cores, and that's going to be two GB bytes.

All right.

So the default strategy here for a rollout is a rolling update.

So we're going to leave that as it is.

Let's save this here.

Let's come back to the terminal.

And now in the terminal here we will apply individual files.

So I'm going to say apply.

And we're going to apply the dev namespace and the caller API Deployment.

All right.

So we're just going to create these two.

We don't need to create the prod nor the color API pod.

Let's first create the namespace.

And then now we're going to create the deployment color API deployment.

And I'm sorry I think I confused that with a little bit with services.

Let's come back to the IDE.

And under selector here we're going to use match match labels.

So match labels and then App Color API.

Right.

So I believe that this is looking better.

Let's now come back to the terminal.

Let's try to apply this once again.

Perfect.

We can confirm that this was created.

Let's get the pods in the namespace dev here.

And we can confirm that all the pods are now up and running.

Perfect.

If we were to now describe let's describe our resource quota.

It's going to be dev quota with a namespace dev.

Here we will see that it's virtually all consumed.

It's virtually all booked up.

So now what actually is going to happen once we come back to our IDE and we want to roll out a new version

of our deployment.

Let's come back to the IDE here, and let's change the image to version 1.1.0.

Let's save this here, and let's come back to the terminal.

And let's try to apply the the color API deployment file once again.

And the moment we do that let's have a look at our pods.

Kubectl get pod oops.

We need to pass the namespace dev here.

And as you can see here we have three pods.

That doesn't seem right.

Right.

So let's wait a little bit.

And as you can see here, this seems to actually be stuck at three pods.

And I already expected an error here because the rolling update how it actually does the update is that

it creates additional pods.

But these additional pods cannot really be scheduled because they will be exceeding the resource quota

of our namespace.

So let's have a look at the Rollout status for the deployment, and that's going to be color API deployment

in the namespace dev.

And the moment we do we do this here, we see that there is still some errors.

There are some errors here.

One out of four new replicas have been updated, so only one replica has been updated here.

Let's cancel this.

And now let's try to describe here our deployment color API deployment namespace dev like so.

And as you can see here, it's still giving us not giving us a lot of information.

So let's see if we can scroll this up a little bit see if we get any errors here.

No there is no or there are no errors here.

But it's showing two unavailable replicas here.

So let's see if we can get the replica set.

So kubectl get replica set in namespace dev.

And the new replica set that we have here.

As you can see, this has a desired count of three, but only one is available.

So let's try to describe this replica set.

Kubectl describe replica set.

We're going to pass the name here.

And the namespace is dev and bingo.

We start getting some very interesting messages here.

And as you can see this is actually what is interesting for us.

So the message is coming.

The bug not the bug, but the error here is clearly visible at the replica set level, because the replica

set level is the one that is responsible for creating new pods.

So the error here is saying that once again we get this forbidden exceeded quota.

And that's because we are trying to create more pods than we actually can based on how much available,

how much resources we have in our dev namespace resource quota.

So this is something that is very easy to oversee and sometimes hard to calculate, because you might

have different teams or different applications being deployed in the same namespace.

And it's not always clear how much of the quota itself is being consumed.

And then suddenly you just want to update a deployment and you're very close to hitting the quota,

and then you're not able to complete that rollout because the quota has been exceeded.

So one way to go about that a couple of ways.

One way to go about it would be for sure to delete like delete a new or resources that are not being

used in the cluster so that you can free up some of the quota.

You could also rightsize them to make sure that they are their requests, and their limits are matching

a little bit more closely their their real resource needs.

And a quick way here, if you do have some hardware available, it would be to directly edit the the

resource quota for the namespace.

So back in the IDE here, let's change.

Let's update this a little bit.

Let's put two two.

Let's put four and four.

We're going to save this here.

Let's come back to the terminal.

Let's apply.

So kubectl apply our dev namespace file.

The quota has been updated here.

And now let's have a look at whether we started doing this here.

Not yet.

So now we can probably have a look at our rollout status here for deployment color API deployment namespace

dev.

And the rollout now is waiting to finish here.

So if we don't want to wait for this thing here to for the exponential backoff to actually come and

try to create new pods in the replica set, because that might take a little bit of time.

We can also restart the rollout like so that's going to restart the rollout.

And now we can see that once we check the rollout here, then we can confirm that the deployment has

successfully rolled out.

So now kubectl get pods sorry namespace dev.

Here we're going to confirm that we have four pods.

That is looking good.

And these pods they are all very new right.

So we can also have a look here at the replica set on namespace dev.

And we can confirm here that the older replica sets, they are now with zero desired.

And we have this new replica set here.

If we were to now describe this replica set, describe replica set.

Let's pass the name here namespace dev.

Then we can confirm that the pods were successfully created.

Once the rollout has succeeded, you can then decide whether you will leave the new resource quota in

place to allow for this room for new pods to be created as part of new rollouts in our deployments.

Or you can also revert the values to their previous amounts, and then make sure that you update the

requests and limits of existing pods, or that you delete resources which are either consuming too much

or not being used in the cluster at all.

And just as a side note, of course this will also impact the the scaling, right?

So if we were to scale this deployment color API deployment namespace dev replicas at ten.

Then, of course, that's not going to work because we don't have enough resources to create ten replicas.

So if we were to now get the pods here, then we're going to confirm that we're just going to have here

three, six, eight pods.

And that's as much as we can get.

The rest here is not going to work.

Right.

So we would then once again try to scale this back to the original one here.

Four.

And then that should also kill some of the pods.

And we should be good to go.

So just keep these resource quotas, requests and limits in mind whenever you're playing around with

pods, with deployments, rolling updates and so on and so forth.

All right.

So let's just delete everything that we have here.

So let's just do a little bit of cleanup.

We're going to delete everything.

There are a few things which will not be found.

That is perfectly fine for us.

If we now get our namespaces we can confirm that the dev namespace is gone.

So we are good to go.














Let's now discuss liveness readiness and startup probes.

They can be very useful for making sure that our containers are in a healthy state before they start

either serving requests or executing their tasks.

Great.

So probes are periodic health checks performed by Kubernetes.

So Kubernetes takes care of these probes by itself.

We don't need to implement any kind of program or script that would have to run on a loop.

For example, this is all managed by Kubernetes and it is used to determine the status of a container.

So they allow Kubernetes to manage the lifecycle of containers by checking if they're healthy and also

ready to serve traffic.

A very bad thing that can happen here is let's say that the container is up and running, but it's not

yet ready to serve traffic, so some of the requests that could be forwarded to this pod would end up

taking a long time to resolve, while the pod actually still is probably spinning up something that

needs to serve the request.

Right.

So it's always good to make sure that the pods are able to serve requests.

And this is where for example, the readiness probe comes in.

So let's go through all of them in detail.

The startup probe it ensures that a container has started successfully.

So if the startup probe fails, Kubernetes will kill the container and it will try to restart it.

For liveness probes they are continuously running.

So they keep executing throughout the container life cycle.

As long as the container is up.

This liveness probes here, they will be executed and they check if the container is still running.

If the liveness probe fails, then Kubernetes will restart the container.

Now it's important to differentiate here.

This does not mean that the container has.

So if the liveness probe fails, doesn't mean that the container has completely stopped from the outside.

The container might still be running from the perspective of the pod, for example.

But if the liveness probe fails, this would indicate some kind of deadlock or some situation where

the container is stuck.

But it's still up, but it's stuck somewhere.

And then Kubernetes would say, okay, let's restart this container here so that it might get a chance

to get out of this deadlock situation.

The last type, the readiness probe here checks if the container is ready to accept traffic.

This is very important.

As already mentioned, if the container is not ready to accept traffic it might so requests might hang

or we might get error codes.

So server side error codes.

So if the readiness probe fails all that happens is that the container will be removed from the list

of endpoints that receive traffic.

So services will not forward traffic to containers if they are.

Readiness probe fails the readiness probe similar to the liveness probe it keeps executing throughout

the container life cycle.

So let's have a closer look at a few diagrams.

Here is an example of a startup probe.

So the container has been created.

Then we go to the next stage and we see is there a startup probe.

If there is no startup probe then Kubernetes will just proceed with the liveness and readiness probes

assuming that they are defined.

But if there is a startup probe, Kubernetes will execute this probe and then it's going to check has

the probe passed?

If the probe passed, then Kubernetes will proceed again with the liveness and readiness probes and

with the entire container initialization.

If, however, the thread's the probe here fails, then we can specify a failure threshold here.

And it's basically a number of times that the probe can fail before Kubernetes takes further action.

So if the threshold has not been exceeded, we can also specify a small delay for the probe to be executed

again, and we will stay in this loop here until either the probe passes or the fail threshold is exceeded.

When this is the case, then Kubernetes will restart the container for the liveness probe.

Then container is running here and we will directly jump into executing the probe as long as it is defined,

right.

So if the liveness probe is defined, it will be continuously executed.

The process is exactly the same.

If the probe passes, then we can specify a small delay here in interval that Kubernetes will keep in

mind when executing the probe so that it doesn't execute too often, right?

So if it passes, then it's going to be a small delay.

It's going to execute the probe again.

And as long as this loop here keeps or as long as the the container stays in this loop here, then it's

all good.

The problem happens if the probe here fails if the liveness probe fails, then we're going to enter

into the failure threshold once again, and it's the exact same thing as before.

If it has not passed, we have the delay here.

The interval execute the probe.

If the threshold has been exceeded, then the container will be restarted and the readiness probe very

similar to the liveness probe.

So it's the same stuff.

Execute probe passes.

Yes.

Keeping this loop here we are all good.

The container is receiving traffic.

If the probe fails then we're going to check if the threshold is exceeded.

If not, let's wait a little bit and execute the probe again.

If it has exceeded, then the container will be removed from the endpoints that receive traffic from

services.

Awesome.

So that's it for liveness readiness and startup probes.

I'm pretty sure that you can leverage them in multiple scenarios during application development and

deployment in Kubernetes.

To make our lives a little bit easier when we explore startup, liveness, and readiness probes.

In the practical exercises, let's quickly extend our color API with a couple of endpoints and a little

bit of custom logic here, so that we can set via environment variables, whether we want these probes

to actually fail or not, so that we don't really need to deploy or create here a different versions

of the code, we can just control this behavior via environment variables.

So let's set here fail underscore startup.

And that's going to come from process.env dot fail underscore startup like so.

And as long as this is set to true then we're going to fail the startup probe.

Or actually maybe we could say this a little bit better here instead of fail.

Let's just delay the startup here so that we can then set in the probe itself, the the certain interval

between the probes and the maximum threshold.

And then if the combination is less than the delay of the startup, then this would fail.

So let's then also set this here delay start up like so.

Good.

Then we have here fail underscore liveness.

So this is going to fail the liveness probe process dot env dot fail underscore liveness.

And as long as this is equal to true then we're good.

And then we have let's add a little bit more logic here.

Fail readiness so that this fails half of the time.

So we're just going to say process dot env dot fail underscore readiness.

And if this is set to true.

So if this is equal to true then what we will do here is we will return a number.

So we're going to return actually a boolean.

That's going to be true half of the time.

And that's going to be false half of the time.

So the math dot random function here will just return a random number between 0 and 1, which means

half of the time it's going to be less than 0.5, and half of the time is going to be more.

So if we set fail readiness to true, then our readiness or our container here has a 50% chance of failing

the readiness probe.

This means that if we have six pods with containers here, then three of them, or approximately three

of them might be a little bit more, a little bit less, they will fail the readiness probe.

Now, if this is true, then we have this expression here.

Otherwise we're just going to set this entire thing to false.

And we're not going to fail the readiness probe.

We can also console.log these values if you wish to do so.

So console log.

And then let's just add here some some message.

So we will say here delay startup.

And then we will pass here the value of the variable.

So delay startup.

And we're going to do the same thing for the fail liveness fail liveness and fail readiness.

And then we'll just pass here fail liveness like so and then fail readiness like so.

All right that's good.

This will give us a little bit of room here to customize the behavior of our pods based on environment

variables, which might be more interesting, easier for us then, if we had to actually touch the code

here and create different tags and different versions.

It's not really that that developer friendly.

So this is a little bit easier to work with.

Let's now extend our endpoints and below the app dot get forward slash API.

Here let's add two endpoints.

We're going to add the app dot get forward slash ready.

And then that's going to be once again a request response.

And we will also add here the health endpoint.

And the health endpoint will be the one we will use for the liveness probe.

And the ready endpoint to be the one that we use for the readiness probe logic here.

Very simple.

If the fail underscore readiness is set to true, all we're going to do is return res dot send status

and we'll simply return here a 503.

That means service unavailable.

Otherwise if this is not the case we'll just return rest dot send.

And we're going to send the okay text, which will also be accompanied by a default code or default

default status of 200.

We can actually implement the same logic here.

So now we're going to say instead of fail readiness that's going to be fail liveness like so.

And this is already looking good.

Now there is one other thing missing.

And this is the delay startup.

So let's just get the delay startup here.

And all we're going to do is we're going to add a very basic a very basic synchronous delay here.

So we will say let start is equal to or actually we can just use const here because we're not going

to change the start date dot now.

And then we will simply create a blocking loop here.

Once again if you are familiar with JavaScript and in general programming in general, you will shout

at me and say like, hey, please never block the event loop in JavaScript or never create such a loop

here synchronously.

But my intention is to actually block everything, right?

So if the date not now is less or minus, the start here is less than 60,000.

This stands for 60s or 60,000 milliseconds here.

Then just do nothing and keep running this loop here until this condition exits.

So this will delay the startup of our application by 60s.

That means if we try to hit the health endpoint here, for example, then we would not be able to get

a response from the health endpoint for 60s.

Now once again, this is on purpose, right?

So we'll even add a comment here.

Purposefully, purposefully block event loop and execution for 60s.

Right.

And this is here to illustrate startup probes.

It's very clear here.

Whoever comes across this code doesn't get angry at me.

That's good.

So now we have everything we need.

We have two endpoints that we can check the readiness and the liveness.

And we also have a way to introduce a small delay in our application so that we can visualize what happens

when the startup probe fails.

Let's save this.

And now we need to build our container.

So back in the terminal, make sure that you are inside of the color API directory here.

And let's go with Docker build.

Let's pass the tag here LM Academy or whatever username you are using.

And that is the color API.

Now we are in version 1.1.0.

So let's just bump this to 1.2.0.

And that is going to be the build in the current directory.

All right.

That is looking good.

We can now push this as well with Docker push LM Academy forward slash color API version 1.2.0.

And that's pretty much everything we need to do.

We can already use this new version of our color API in the upcoming lectures.

Once again, there was no breaking change here.

That's why I'm bumping the minor version, because all the defaults of our failed probes and everything,

they are set to false, right?

If anything was set to true and there was a breaking change, then I would have bumped the major version.

But that's just an aside comment.

That's great.

Let's then wrap up this lecture.

Let's take a short break and I'll see you in the next video.


Let's now start discussing liveness readiness and start up probes.

The name of the directory would be too long here, so I just put a summary.

Health probes.

Right.

New directory.

No files here.

If you wish to reuse some pod files.

That's also okay if you just want to speed up some stuff.

But I would recommend that you just use the same images that we will be creating, or that we will be

using in the following lectures.

Let's create a new file here.

That's just going to be our color API dot YAML pod.

Let's quickly rename this.

Let me close this here.

Quickly rename this from color API to color API pod because we also want to have a deployment afterwards.

So API version will be v1 and then kind will be pod.

Once again let's just add the the autocomplete here.

Color API pod or actually just color API will be good enough.

Or maybe we add pod I don't know, let's just add the pod here.

Good.

Um, now let's set here our color API pod.

We don't need to set the resources for now.

The container here will be.

We will advertise port 80 and the image will use LM Academy Forward slash color dash API version 1.2.0.

So make sure that you're using the version 1.2.0 here, because this is the version that has the endpoints

for the health probes, as well as the option to delay the startup for us to see what happens with the

startup probe health probes.

They are defined at the at the container level here.

So we should define them in the list that is created here.

Right.

So now we're going to say that we will have a startup probe here startup probe.

And the definition is fairly straightforward.

So we can define a variety of different probes.

They can be HTTP requests.

They can be grcp requests.

They can be some shell scripts or something that we want to execute inside of the container.

For us here we will simply say http get.

And this is going to issue a Get request to a specified path that we will define here.

And the path that we will use is the health path.

We can also set the port here and the port will be port 80 within the container.

I am getting a little bit annoyed by these squiggly lines here, so let's just set the resources just

so that the container here the IDE stops complaining.

So resources.

And then we will say here limits.

And then we'll say then CPU.

That's going to be I don't know, let's put 500 milli cause of CPU and memory.

That's going to be let's put 512 maybe bytes just so that we have now or we start following here the

conventions of always defining resources at the container level, since we already know how to do this.

All right.

So we have our startup probe defined here.

We can also have liveness probe and readiness probe.

But let's now focus on the startup probe like so.

So here now our startup probe is going to successfully execute.

We can make it a little bit faster in case we want to visualize the results a little bit faster.

We can set both the failure threshold.

That's going to specify how many times the startup probe can fail before the container gets restarted.

I'm just going to set it to two here.

And we can also set the period in seconds here between the probes.

So let's just set this to three seconds.

So after six seconds the container should fail.

If the startup probe is is is unsuccessful then the container should be restarted.

Let's save this here.

Let's come to the terminal.

And let's apply this pod and confirm that everything will go through successfully in the terminal.

Make sure you are inside of health probes inside of the folder health probes.

Let's just run kubectl apply with the file color API pod.

And now we can have a look here get pod.

And let's watch this so that we confirm that the pod will eventually change into a running state.

Perfect.

So after a few seconds here, the pod entered into a running state.

And we have one of one ready containers.

That's great.

So we can confirm that the startup probe is successfully passing.

Let's now see if we can break the startup probe by using our environment variables back in the IDE,

we can set environment variables at the container level with the very straightforward setup here with

env.

And then we just need to pass the variable.

The name of our variable is delay startup.

And actually we should also add here.

So this is a list of environment variables.

So the name of the variable is delay startup and the value of the variable will simply be true, like

so.

So when the delay startup is set to true, then the startup of the or the entire startup of our http

API will be delayed by 60s.

That means this startup probe here should fail.

So let's come back to the IDE and let's see if this is the case.

Back in the IDE, we're going to delete the pod that we have.

So kubectl delete and the file is going to be called API pod.

And then we're going to create the pod once again.

And we will now watch the kubectl get pod command.

And as you can see here bingo.

Now after roughly six seconds here our startup probe failed.

And we start seeing our container getting restarted.

So every six seconds here the container will be restarted.

And then eventually we will enter into this crash loop.

Back off here Because the container has been restarted for enough times so that Kubernetes enters into

this crash loop.

Back off error.

So now if we have a look at the kubectl describe pod and we can pass the color API pod.

Here we can have a look at what we actually get here as a message.

And as you can see here at the bottom we are getting a warning.

Unhealthy reason here.

So the reason is unhealthy.

And the startup probe has failed.

So this whenever we try to get this endpoint here because the server is not up and running it's not

listening.

Then the connection is refused.

And if we have a look at once again get pod and with the watch command, then we will have a look that

the restart count here just keeps increasing and the container is actually never in a ready state.

So if startup probes fail then they will lead to restart of the container and if too many restarts or

if enough restarts happen, then we will enter into this crash loop.

Back off here while this crash loop back off is basically doing is it's adding a little bit of delay

before actually restarting the container and trying this again.

Awesome.

So we saw how we can leverage startup probes for container restarts to make sure that if the container

is not successfully started, then we get a restart and we attempt to try things again.

Let's quickly change here in our IDE.

Let's set the delay startup to false.

Now we're going to save this.

Let's come back to the terminal.

In the terminal let's delete our existing pod or not described.

That should be delete.

So kubectl delete the current pod.

And I believe that's all we need to do.

Let's just confirm we get no pods running here in the default namespace.

That's great.

Let's then take a short break and come back in the next lecture to continue exploring health probes.



Before we explore liveness and readiness probes.

I just observed that I introduced a small bug here.

When I coded this, I just forgot to actually add an independent endpoint here that we can use for successful

startup probes.

But failed readiness or liveness probes.

So if we fail a liveness probe here, I was thinking, okay, we can use the health endpoint for both

startup and liveness probes.

But if we want to fail, only the startup and or actually if we want to fail only the liveness here,

then there is no way for us to do that.

Because if the startup passes and uses this forward slash health here, then the the liveness here,

it has to pass.

Otherwise the startup will also fail.

So let's just add a dedicated endpoint here for the startup.

And we're going to add up here.

And then this will just always return okay.

Right.

So it like so it's going to look a little bit better.

So whenever we hit the up endpoint we just get the message okay here.

And the startup probe will fail due to the delay.

So let's save this now.

And let's come back to the IDE to just build and push this image in the IDE.

Let's now run Docker build and the tag here LM Academy forward slash color dash API.

And then this is a bug fix.

So that's going to be 1.2.1.

And I'm going to use the current directory as the context.

That's looking good.

So now we're going to simply push this image with Docker push.

And now we should pass the correct version here.

And then once this is available we can continue with the next lecture.

Perfect.

Let's then take a short break and come back in the next lecture to now finally discuss liveness probes.


Hello and welcome back.

Sorry for the small hiccup here.

Let's just fix now our startup probe to hit the up end point.

And then we're going to have to use the version 1.2.1 here so that the up end point is available.

And now independent from the liveness probe we can confirm that this is going to work as expected.

Let's save this.

Come to the terminal and let's then create our pod with cube CTL apply.

Let's then create it here.

And we can now have a look at the pod health.

And we can wait a little bit.

And then we will confirm that the container here is then considered to be in a ready state.

That's great.

Let's then delete our pod here and let's now implement our liveness probe.

The liveness probe is very similar.

Once again the probes they all have very similar configuration just really depends.

Or what changes here is when they are played, as well as the consequences of or what happens when they

fail.

So the liveness probe here, we're not going to eat the up end point.

We're going to hit the health endpoint.

And let's now add here a failure threshold of maybe let's say 83 and then 10s between the probes.

Let's save this here.

And now we can add a new environment variable to control what's going to happen.

So that's just going to be fail underscore liveness.

And we're going to set the value to true.

Let's then save this here.

Let's now come to the terminal.

And let's create this pod in the terminal.

Let's clear the screen.

Let's run kubectl apply once again.

And now we can have a look here kubectl get pod.

And let's watch what's going to happen.

So as you can see the pod actually gets into a or the container gets into a ready state.

It passes the startup probe.

Now the liveness probe here is running behind the scenes and it's hitting the health endpoint.

And this is failing.

Now this would take roughly 30s for the container to be restarted.

But as you can see, bingo.

After 30s the container is restarted because the liveness probe failed and now the container goes into

ready state and the liveness probe keeps executing here behind the scenes.

And then roughly after another 30s, the container would be restarted once again.

In our case here, this is once again a makeup example, right.

So this is like a theoretical example.

So that means if other applications were hitting other endpoints then it would work fine because we

did not really implement any logic to completely shut down the application.

But in real life and in real projects, then the liveness probe should really represent something that,

hey, if it is failing, that means that the container is not alive, it's not healthy, and it should

be restarted.

All right.

Great.

So we saw here that the container was restarted three times during this discussion.

We can stop this here.

We can now delete the the pod.

And basically then just to summarize, the behavior of liveness of failed liveness probes is very similar

to failed startup probes.

And it just basically leads to the container being restarted.

Let's then take a short break and come back in the next lecture to discuss readiness probes.


Let's now discuss readiness probes.

And for that, let's just make sure that we set the fail liveness to false so that it doesn't fail here.

But now we're actually going to work with deployments and services.

Because I want to show you what happens when readiness probes fail.

Let's create a new file called API deployment here dot YAML.

We're just going to copy the the template here for from our pod.

And we're going to paste it here.

And now we're just going to use apps forward slash v1.

The kind will be deployment.

The name will be color API.

And you can just say color API labels.

Let's use app here color API.

Now the spec requires a few things here.

Let's just add templates so that we can put the container here under the correct indentation.

That's looking better.

And we also need to have a metadata with labels with app and then color API.

And we also need a selector here.

Selector match labels.

And then that's going to be app color API like so.

And then we're going to set a replicas number here.

And we're going to have six replicas.

All right.

So now let's have a look here at our information.

So the container is looking good.

The name can be color API container or color API like so then we have the image ports is also looking

good.

Resource is looking good.

The environment here we're going to set the the delay startup and the fail liveness to false both.

So let's add a new one here.

And we're going to call this fail readiness.

And this one we're going to set to true.

So we're going to leave both the startup and the liveness probes defined here.

Now let's copy this and let's paste this here.

And let's define our readiness probe.

So readiness probe here.

And then we're going to query or we're going to hit the ready endpoint Point.

The failed threshold here will be let's add a little bit less.

Let's say two.

And then period seconds are going to be five here.

That means that after roughly 10s a this this container here is not going to be considered healthy and

it will not receive traffic.

So let's leave this as it is and let's observe how this behaves.

We also wish to create a service.

We can create the service here on the same file if you wish to do so.

So API version is going to be v1.

The kind will be service.

So kind service.

And then we're going to have here a metadata color API svc.

Let's just add this here or delete this here.

And I believe that we're actually creating quite a few quite a few different objects here.

I also want to use the traffic generator.

So let's just create a folder here.

And then we will say readiness probes like so that's just going to make things easier.

Let's move the deployment in here.

And let's also then create colour API, svc, dot YAML.

And we'll also create the traffic traffic generator.

Generator dot YAML like so.

And let's just now take this information from here.

Let's cut this information and let's save this file.

Let's paste in the service.

The port is going to be port 80.

The target port will also be port 80.

The selector app here is going to be color API.

So we can just confirm that's exactly the same here that we have for the labels app color API.

So that is looking good.

And now here for the traffic generator I'm just going to copy this and paste it here.

And I'm just going to change a few things.

So it's going to be traffic generator.

The label name here will be traffic generator.

Can also use app here.

And now the name of the container will be Traffic Generator and the image here will be traffic generator

version 1.0.0.

We don't need to advertise any ports.

We don't need the environment variables.

We don't need startup liveness probes.

So I'm just going to remove this from here.

And now we can set a couple of arguments right.

So args once again the traffic generator takes two arguments.

The first one will be the endpoint we want to hit.

And that's just going to be the name of the service.

And that's going to be the name of the service.

I'm just going to copy it here.

I'm going to paste it here.

And we're going to hit default.

Hit the forward slash API.

And then the delay we're just going to use half a second 0.5 like so perfect.

So just once again to recap what we did here.

We in the color API we have created a new deployment with six replicas.

And then we have set the fail readiness environment variable to true.

Now remember from the implementation.

That means that there is a 50% chance that the pod or the container will end up in a not ready state.

That means for six replicas, approximately three might be a little bit less, a little bit more, depending

on chance.

Right?

Um, but some of them should roughly, or some of them should eventually not serve requests.

So we also set here the readiness probe to roughly fail after 10s.

And we are hitting the forward slash ready endpoint.

So let's save this here.

Let's come back to the terminal.

Let's confirm whether we have any pods up and running I don't if you do you are free to delete them

or not.

I mean that's up to you.

And now let's just apply what is in the readiness probes directory.

Oops, I think I forgot to add apps for the slash v1.

So let's just come back here to the IDE and in our deployment just I think no that's correct here.

What I messed up is that this should be spec here and then we should have the containers, right.

So apologies for this.

Just got a little bit mixed up.

Let's save this and let's come back to the terminal and try it again in the terminal.

Let's just delete everything that we have here.

And that's going to be the readiness probes.

And let's apply this once again.

If you want to delete this with force it might be the case here.

If you get this warning message just delete everything with the force and then we're good to go.

Let's apply this once again.

And I believe that now we're good to go.

So let's get our pods.

We can confirm that we have six seven pods and all the pods are up and running.

And as you can see here we have one pod that is considered unhealthy.

Right.

So we can see here that there is zero out of one ready pods.

And if we were to or ready containers here.

And if we were to copy this and let's now describe so kubectl describe pod let's paste this here.

We would then eventually find the message here that the readiness probe failed with a status code of

503.

So this is a pod that is considered unhealthy, right?

So this this has failed.

If we scroll here a little bit, I believe that's a little bit at the bottom.

Yes, we will find the conditions here.

And this conditions are interesting because they are saying that the pod is not ready and the containers

are not ready.

So now here, let's try once again, because I believe that only one is a little bit hard to see.

So let's just delete everything here and let's see if we can recreate the the entire thing.

So kubectl apply readiness probes.

And let's see if now we get a few more containers here that are failing or a few more pods that are

failing.

All right.

It seems I'm not very lucky because now it seems like all the pods are failing.

So let me just describe here and let's have a look.

Uh, yes.

So this also failed, and it seems like none of the pods is actually working here.

So what we can try is we can try to actually scale.

Let's scale this deployment.

And the deployment is the caller API deployment.

And the number of replicas here will be zero.

So we're just going to completely remove the replicas.

When we get replicas when we get the pods there is nothing.

And let's now scale back to six instead of deleting and recreating.

And now hopefully perfect.

So now finally got something a little bit better.

So three of these pods are considered unhealthy and three are considered healthy.

So much for 50% right.

But again that's probability.

Um, so now the traffic generator here, if we were to have a look at the logs of our traffic generator.

Now this should actually be receiving responses only from the healthy pods.

So as you can see here, let's just scroll up a little bit.

We can actually maybe follow the logs here with dash F.

And let's have a look that we are actually getting responses only from three different containers or

from three different pods here.

So let's env for x and bf.

So as you can see here, if we keep looking up and down we're going to find only these three pods returning

or only these three pods receiving traffic.

And that's exactly what the role of a readiness probe is.

It is to prevent sending traffic to pods which have containers that are not able to respond to this

traffic.

So if the containers are not passing the readiness probe, that's a great thing for us to avoid these

containers.

And then we should then go and see what's actually happening with them.

But they will not receive traffic.

And that's great for us.

Let's now stop following here the the logs.

And what I want to show you is what is actually done behind the scenes.

We can describe our service.

So let's describe the color API svc work here.

And the moment we do that, you should see that in the end points here, the end point section.

This is where we can visualize that we have only three pods receiving traffic.

So there are only three pods here.

And we could go and try to match here what we get.

So let's see kubectl get pod.

I believe we do not have the the IP here, but maybe with white we would get the IP.

Yes.

Perfect.

So if we get the output here with the output white flag then we can get the IP.

And we can confirm here that the four ex-bf.

And the other one is the env here.

So that's going to be 6768 and 63.

And we can confirm that these are the ones that are actually registered here.

This is another very strong use case to using services because they handle unhealthy pods.

And they handle pods that are not ready to receive traffic in a very graceful manner.

Right.

So hopefully this also clarifies why you should always set up probes in your containers so that there

is already an automatic remediation here, or there are some steps taken by Kubernetes to make sure

that either the container is restarted and then hopefully the problems are solved, or if the container

is really not ready, that it doesn't get any traffic and it doesn't impact your end users that are

hitting a certain service, let's then just delete here everything.

So kubectl delete force readiness probes.

We're going to delete everything here.

Let's just make sure that we have a clean slate at the end of this lecture.

That's good.

We have no resources in the default namespace I believe there are also no services here.

Let's have a look.

Yeah there is only the Kubernetes service.

So that's good.

This comes by default and we should not delete it.

So I believe we are good to go to close this lecture.

Let's take a short break and I'll see you in the next video.


