Hello and welcome back.

Let's start our discussion around volumes and volumes here.

They really bring a lot of the concepts of Docker in terms of persistence because as you already know,

what we run in Kubernetes are containers.

And containers by definition do not have persistent storage.

Anytime we need to have persistent storage or we need to share data between containers, then we should

think volumes.

So let's start discussing it.

Volumes are a directories basically from the perspective of the container.

Right.

So it's just going to be a directory possibly with some data in it.

And they are accessible to containers in a pod.

The Kubernetes website summarizes it better than I could.

So basically from the container perspective, volumes are just directories.

And we would work with directories in any way that we normally do.

Now, what changes depending on which kind of volume we use is how that directory comes to be and the

medium that backs it, and also the contents of that directory.

So when we say here the medium that backs it, it means that there is a variety of way, variety of

storage solutions that could be used to back the the volumes here.

And you can think EBS or EFS and AWS, you can think of any kind of storage solution in GCP or Azure,

or even a local SSD in a node or a host in Kubernetes.

So there is a variety of ways that we can or a variety of back ends that we can use to actually store

the data.

And this is what will result in or this is what will lead to different types of volumes.

So to use a volume we should specify the volumes in the pods spec dot volumes section here of the specification.

And then we should declare where to mount these volumes into the containers in the dot spec Pack containers

volume mounts.

So we will specify under the pod definition file the volumes we are interested in.

And then we're going to map these volumes that we have specified here to specific volume mounts in the

containers.

Naturally the volumes they should exist beforehand.

Right.

So we should create our persistent volumes and respective persistent volume claims beforehand before

we can use them here.

Or config maps should exist beforehand.

So it's they should be there.

We're going to explore how to create them in details in the upcoming lectures.

And also when we talk about configuration management, the bottom line is as long as the volume is there,

then all we need to do is to specify them in the volume section here of the pod, and then declaring

where to mount these volumes into the containers.

So let's have a look at a diagram to understand a little bit better.

So let's say we have here a Kubernetes cluster.

We have a certain node.

And then within this node we have a pod.

And in the volume section here.

And we're going to just assume that this all exists right.

So in the volume section here we're going to specify a couple of volumes.

That's going to be pod temporary storage.

So that's just going to be stored within the pod.

That's called empty Dir volume.

And this is going to have the same lifecycle as the pod.

We can also specify a local directory in the node itself so that it's different or decoupled from the

pod.

It will be persistent persisted beyond the pods lifecycle.

But once again if there is any issue with the node or if the pod, or if we end up scheduling our application

in a different node, then that's not going to have the same data.

We can also leverage configmaps from other parts of our Kubernetes cluster, and we can mount them as

volumes within our containers.

And that basically means take the configuration data here.

That's very common to inject configuration into our application.

And don't worry, we're going to work with Configmaps and Secrets in upcoming sections.

But the bottom line is they just have a bunch of data that we can mount as a volume within our containers,

and we can also use third party solutions, let's say elastic block storage here, or EFS from AWS for

Elastic File System.

And we can create volumes of persistent volumes backed by this medium here.

And we can just mount them.

We can inform like we can leverage them and use them within the pods as well.

And then from the perspective of the container, once again, all we are going to do is we will inform

the volume mounts.

We're going to say what's the name of the volume.

So this name here is going to match this name here.

And this name here is going to match this name here.

So this is one example of us leveraging EBS for example elastic block storage for storing let's say

some database data.

Right.

And this here we could store something else.

And as already mentioned, Kubernetes supports many other storage backends and we can create our own

as well, as long as we want to really dig deeper into how to do that.

And we can comply with the specification.

So we should.

If you really want to explore more about this, I would just say go and have a look at CSI drivers.

So container storage interface.

And that would start pointing you in the direction of how you can actually create your own driver to

support your own custom storage solution.

Just before we wrap up, I just want to zoom in a little bit more into some common, different types

of volumes that we work with.

The empty volume type here is used for ephemeral storage within the pod, for some scratch data, or

some files that are temporary but must be or should be, for example, shared between containers, and

they follow the lifecycle of the pod.

So when the pod is terminated, the contents of this volume here.

They're also deleted the local volume here.

It kind of supersedes what is very well known as the host path.

This is also some common type of volume that you might see, especially in older code bases.

It does introduce security vulnerabilities or it might let's say may introduce right.

And it is currently discouraged.

And the alternative the recommended alternative is local.

So what local does is it creates a durable storage within a specific node.

This here is considered a persistent volume.

That means we need to have a persistent volume definition.

And we also need to have a persistent volume claim.

We're going to see how to do that a little bit later on in the course.

It does also require setting node affinity here.

And that's important because this is a local directory inside of a specific node.

That means when pods wish to use this volume, it does make sense that they have to follow some rules

to be mounted in the correct node, so this is preferred over host path.

We then also have persistent volume here.

That's a little bit more general.

It does include local as well.

But I put here separate because this can be backed by multiple technologies.

Cloud storage here.

And very interestingly it can be statically or dynamically provisioned.

We're going to explore that a little bit later on see what it means.

But bottom line is that statically we need to create the persistent volume before we can create a claim

to use it.

Dynamically provisioned is a little bit different.

We will create the claim to use it, and then the persistent volume will be created to match that claim.

We then also have two other very common volume types the config maps.

They are used to inject configuration data into pods, and they allow us to not have to.

To hard code the data into the Pod definition.

That can be very useful for managing configuration and the secret volume type as well.

The secrets can be used to inject sensitive data into pods, without having to hard code them into the

pod definition.

Of course, here we would never want to hard code secret data in files that are committed to the repository,

so we would also need to load this data in some other way.

But nonetheless, we can mount secrets as volumes inside of our containers so that they can access the

data from the secret.

Um, just a reminder here.

We will cover working with Configmaps and secrets later in the course, so I'm not going to cover them

now in this section.

They are coming a little bit later, but don't worry, we're going to dive a little bit deeper into


========================================================================
STRUCTURED NOTES ADDITION
========================================================================

Kubernetes Storage and Volumes

This section keeps the original notes above untouched and adds a cleaner
study version below.

1. Big Idea

Containers are ephemeral.

That means:

- data inside the container filesystem is not a safe place for important state
- restarting or replacing a container can lose local data
- Kubernetes needs a storage model for persistence and sharing

Kubernetes solves this with volumes and persistent storage resources.

2. What a Volume Is

From the container's perspective, a volume is just a directory mounted into
the container.

What changes between volume types is:

- where the data really lives
- how long the data lives
- whether it is shared
- whether it survives Pod replacement
- which backend provides the storage

3. Why We Use Volumes

Common reasons:

- persist application data
- share files between containers in the same Pod
- inject configuration files
- inject secrets
- provide scratch space for temporary processing

4. Where Volumes Are Declared

In Kubernetes, volumes are defined at the Pod level and mounted into one or
more containers.

The two main places are:

- `spec.volumes`
- `spec.containers[].volumeMounts`

Simple pattern:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: demo-pod
spec:
  volumes:
    - name: app-storage
      emptyDir: {}

  containers:
    - name: app
      image: nginx
      volumeMounts:
        - name: app-storage
          mountPath: /data
```

Important rule:

- the volume name in `volumeMounts.name` must match the volume name in `spec.volumes`

5. Pod-Level Thinking

Volumes belong to the Pod, not directly to a single container.

That means:

- multiple containers in the same Pod can mount the same volume
- the same volume can be mounted at different paths in different containers
- Pod lifecycle often matters when choosing the storage type

6. Main Volume Categories

At a high level, Kubernetes storage usually falls into these groups:

- ephemeral Pod storage
- node-local storage
- persistent cluster storage
- configuration-backed storage

7. `emptyDir`

`emptyDir` is created when the Pod starts.

Use it when:

- you need temporary scratch storage
- you want containers in the same Pod to share files
- you do not need the data after the Pod is gone

Properties:

- lifecycle is tied to the Pod
- survives container restarts inside the same Pod
- disappears when the Pod is deleted

Example:

```yaml
volumes:
  - name: cache
    emptyDir: {}
```

Typical use cases:

- temporary file processing
- caching
- sidecar sharing files with the main app

8. Local and Node-Based Storage

Sometimes storage is tied to one node.

This means the data may survive Pod deletion, but it is still bound to that
specific machine.

Important consequence:

- if the Pod is scheduled onto another node, it may not see the same data

This is why node-local storage must be used carefully.

9. `hostPath`

`hostPath` mounts a path from the node's filesystem into the Pod.

Example idea:

- mount `/var/log` from the node into a container

Why it is risky:

- tight coupling to the node
- security concerns
- not portable
- often unsuitable for normal application data

It is commonly seen in:

- demos
- local experiments
- some infrastructure agents

In general application design, it is usually discouraged.

10. `local` Persistent Volumes

`local` storage is the more structured alternative for node-local persistent
storage.

Key traits:

- data lives on a specific node
- accessed through PersistentVolumes
- commonly requires node affinity

Why node affinity matters:

- the Pod must run on the node where the storage actually exists

Good for:

- high-performance local disks
- specialized workloads where node locality is acceptable

Not ideal for:

- workloads that need easy failover across nodes

11. Persistent Storage with PV and PVC

This is the most important storage model for real applications.

The key resources are:

- PersistentVolume (`PV`)
- PersistentVolumeClaim (`PVC`)

Mental model:

- `PV` = actual storage made available to the cluster
- `PVC` = request for storage made by a workload

Then the Pod uses the claim.

Flow:

```text
Storage backend -> PersistentVolume -> PersistentVolumeClaim -> Pod
```

12. PersistentVolume

A PersistentVolume represents cluster storage.

It can be backed by:

- cloud block storage
- cloud file storage
- network storage
- local storage
- CSI-provided custom backends

Important characteristics:

- capacity
- access modes
- reclaim policy
- storage class

13. PersistentVolumeClaim

A PersistentVolumeClaim is how a workload asks for storage.

The claim can request:

- size
- access mode
- storage class

The Pod usually references the PVC, not the PV directly.

Example:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: app-pvc
spec:
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteOnce
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 1Gi
```

14. Using a PVC in a Pod

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: pvc-demo
spec:
  volumes:
    - name: data
      persistentVolumeClaim:
        claimName: app-pvc
  containers:
    - name: app
      image: nginx
      volumeMounts:
        - name: data
          mountPath: /usr/share/nginx/html
```

15. Static vs Dynamic Provisioning

There are two main ways storage appears for a workload.

Static provisioning:

- an admin creates the PV first
- then a PVC binds to it

Dynamic provisioning:

- the PVC is created first
- Kubernetes provisions the backing storage automatically
- this usually depends on a StorageClass

Dynamic provisioning is common in cloud-native clusters.

16. StorageClass

A StorageClass defines how storage should be provisioned.

It can describe:

- provisioner
- storage type
- performance tier
- reclaim behavior
- binding behavior

This is what enables dynamic provisioning.

17. Access Modes

Common access modes:

- `ReadWriteOnce` (`RWO`)
- `ReadOnlyMany` (`ROX`)
- `ReadWriteMany` (`RWX`)

Quick intuition:

- `RWO`: mounted read-write by one node
- `ROX`: mounted read-only by many nodes
- `RWX`: mounted read-write by many nodes

Whether a mode is actually supported depends on the storage backend.

18. Reclaim Policy

A PersistentVolume can define what happens after the claim is released.

Common policies:

- `Retain`
- `Delete`

`Retain` means the data is kept for manual handling.

`Delete` means the underlying storage may be removed automatically.

This is a high-impact production setting.

19. ConfigMap Volumes

ConfigMaps can be mounted as files.

This is useful when an application expects:

- config files
- templates
- property files
- JSON or YAML settings

Example:

```yaml
volumes:
  - name: config
    configMap:
      name: app-config
```

Mounted files appear inside the container filesystem.

20. Secret Volumes

Secrets can also be mounted as files.

Use them for:

- certificates
- tokens
- passwords
- private keys

Example:

```yaml
volumes:
  - name: secret-data
    secret:
      secretName: app-secret
```

Important note:

- Secrets are sensitive, but not magically secure by default
- access control and storage encryption still matter

21. Cloud Storage Backends

In managed Kubernetes environments, storage is often backed by cloud services.

Examples:

- AWS EBS
- AWS EFS
- GCP Persistent Disk
- Azure Disk
- Azure Files

General pattern:

- block storage is common for single-instance databases
- shared file storage is common when multiple replicas need shared files

22. CSI Drivers

CSI means Container Storage Interface.

This is the standard way Kubernetes integrates with storage systems.

CSI drivers make it possible to:

- use cloud storage providers
- use vendor storage appliances
- use custom storage systems

If you want to understand advanced Kubernetes storage, CSI is a core topic.

23. Choosing the Right Storage Type

Use `emptyDir` when:

- data is temporary
- data only needs to live as long as the Pod
- containers in the same Pod need shared scratch space

Use ConfigMap or Secret volumes when:

- you are injecting configuration or secret material

Use PVC-backed persistent storage when:

- data must survive Pod replacement
- the application is stateful
- storage lifecycle should be managed cleanly

Use local or node-bound storage only when:

- you accept node coupling
- you understand scheduling implications

24. Common Mistakes

Mistake 1:

- storing important data only inside the container filesystem

Mistake 2:

- using `hostPath` for normal production application storage

Mistake 3:

- forgetting that `emptyDir` is deleted with the Pod

Mistake 4:

- expecting a multi-node workload to share storage without using a backend that supports it

Mistake 5:

- creating a PVC without a matching StorageClass or provisioner in the cluster

25. Interview and Real-World Questions to Practice

- What is the difference between a PV and a PVC?
- When would you use `emptyDir`?
- Why is `hostPath` discouraged?
- What is the difference between static and dynamic provisioning?
- Why might a Pod fail to mount a PVC?
- When do you need `ReadWriteMany`?
- Why does local storage often require node affinity?

26. Quick Summary

- volumes are mounted directories from the container point of view
- volumes are declared at the Pod level
- `emptyDir` is temporary and Pod-scoped
- ConfigMaps and Secrets can be mounted as files
- persistent storage is typically handled with PVs and PVCs
- dynamic provisioning usually depends on a StorageClass
- CSI drivers connect Kubernetes to real storage systems

27. Minimal Study Order

If you are learning this topic from scratch, study it in this order:

1. Pod volumes and `volumeMounts`
2. `emptyDir`
3. ConfigMap and Secret volumes
4. PV and PVC
5. StorageClass and dynamic provisioning
6. local storage and node affinity
7. CSI drivers


how to work with them, and we'll also cover how to mount them as volumes in containers.

Awesome.

Let's then take a short break and I'll see you in the next lecture.



Let's have a closer look at how empty dir and local volumes work.

So empty dir is board level storage.

Here.

It is considered ephemeral by the definition between ephemeral and persistent.

So this is defined at the pod level, and the volume is created when the pod is assigned to a node,

it is created and accessible only from within the pod.

That means we cannot have an empty dir here that is accessible, or that is created in one pod and then

trying to access from another pod.

Now I'm talking pods and not containers, right.

So containers within the same pod, they can all access this volume here.

As long as we mount these volumes within the containers, the volume is initially empty and all the

containers in the pod can read and write the same files in this empty dir volume.

They might also mount the volume in different paths, right?

So the actual end path here doesn't really matter.

So I mean end path inside of the container, the we can use different paths for that.

When a pod is removed from a node, then the data in the empty door is deleted permanently.

It will be gone, right?

So you should never use this for persistent storage.

Local volumes.

They are persistent by definition in comparison to ephemeral.

Here that means the data is persisted beyond the pod lifecycle and local volumes are defined at the

node level.

So the kube scheduler, they it knows how to assign pods to nodes based on the affinity constraints

defined in the persistent volume configuration.

So when we create local volumes we need to specify some node affinity configuration.

We will see how to do that.

And then Kubernetes will take care of assigning pods that use these volumes to the nodes that match,

or to the nodes that have the volume available.

So setting a persistent volume node affinity is mandatory when using local volumes, and like other

persistent volumes, it does require creating persistent volume claims so that the pods can use the

storage once more.

Remark, which might be useful to keep in mind is that local volumes only support static provisioning,

so we need to create them.

We need to create persistent volumes before we create the claims for them to work properly.

All right.

So just to summarize here, very important to keep that in mind because keeping the data lifecycle in

mind is very important.

The empty door volumes they follow the pods lifecycle.

That means once the pod is gone the data is gone.

The local volumes they follow the nodes life cycle.

That means if for whatever reason, your node is gone and it is replaced with a new node, then the

data will also be gone.

So none of these modules, none of these modes here, none of these volumes is actually recommended

for production workloads for storing persistent data.

If the data can be lost, like if it is okay to lose data, then you might consider such a solution.

But normally in production setups you would not use empty dir nor local volumes, except if you have

the the use case for them.

Right.

Which is here.

Like really, you want to store some temporary ephemeral data and share between containers.

Then by all means go ahead with empty dir or you want to have some also data stored in the node.

Or maybe you want your containers to read some data from the node.

Then local volumes here can also be used.

All I want to highlight is that just keep in mind the data will be gone if the pod is deleted here,

or if the node is deleted or replaced here.

Awesome.

That's it for an introduction to empty dir and local volumes.

Let's take a short break and come back in the next lecture.



Let's now explore working with the empty Dir Ephemeral storage.

And let's start then with a new folder so completely clean folder we're going to use for this section.

No files within here.

Let's just then create a new file and we'll simply say here empty empty dir.

Example dot YAML.

So empty dir is ephemeral storage.

That means it is bound to the pod.

And as already mentioned, it will follow the pod lifecycle.

If the pod gets deleted, then the the directory here and all the data that is stored in that directory

will also be deleted.

Let's then create a Pod definition file with API version v1 and we will have here kind pod.

And then we will can already complete here let's say empty dir demo.

And let's just remove here the application as always.

And now for the image here.

Instead of using a custom image, let's just use the BusyBox image with the tag 1.36.1.

Let's now see how we can define the volumes here.

So volumes they are.

Once again, they are defined in two ways.

Or actually they are defined and used in two different places here.

So let's just fix the port.

We don't need to expose any port here.

And the volumes are first defined.

Or they are connected to a pod by creating a volumes section.

Here this volumes configuration is a list of objects.

So we can specify more than one volume.

And then the first one here.

Let's then start passing name is going to be let's say temporary storage.

And then we will specify the actual configuration.

So to specify an empty directory we will use the empty dir key here.

And that's going to specify the configuration of our empty dir volume.

So we can pass an empty configuration by just passing the curly brackets like so open and close.

Otherwise we have options to set the medium here if we wish to use memory instead of disk storage.

Otherwise, it will default to disk storage, which will be probably 99% of the cases.

You will use this.

You might want to use memory if you have some some application that needs very fast, very high performance.

But just be aware that this will also consume the resource limits and requests here from the containers.

Right.

So if you put let's say two gigabytes here in the memory then and you don't have enough resource requests,

then this will lead to errors.

We can also specify the size limit here for our volume.

And we can say for example 500MB or 512MB or 256MB.

So we can go with whatever size limit we want to set here.

Otherwise it will just default to what is available in terms of storage.

And if we leave this empty, then these two configurations they will not be set for this volume.

So in the first moment Here we have defined the volume within the pod so we can define an empty volume

that's also creating the volume.

Or we can add here other types of volumes which will explore a little bit later on.

In this section we will see how we can reference volumes that are externally defined, and then bring

them and make them usable from within the pod.

So this is the first moment we have created the volume definition.

And now we need to mount this volume inside of our containers.

To mount a volume.

We're going to pass the configuration option here volume mounts.

And this is once again a list or an array of objects which will specify where this volume is actually

mounted in which directory within the container.

The data from this volume will be available.

So the name here that we will use it has to reference the name of the volume at the bottom here, so

that Kubernetes knows which volume we are talking about.

So this has to be the same, right?

So far here we have been using name keys as something that is fairly arbitrary.

But here it changes a little bit.

So the name is kind of a reference to the volume here.

So these two they need to match.

And then we will specify the mount path.

And the mount path is where or under which directory or folder this volume here will be mounted.

So here we can say anything we wish.

I'm just going to put here user slash share forward slash temporary.

And then we have the data from this volume actually mounted inside of this directory.

Great.

Let's just explore or let's begin by exploring the transient the ephemeral nature of this volume.

So for that we're going to change a little bit the command that we use here for BusyBox so that the

container stays up.

And then the command will be a list of strings.

So pass the shell string here, and then we'll pass the dash C so that we run a command with shell.

And the command we want to run is sleep 3600.

That's great.

So let's save this.

And I believe that's all we need in our configuration here for us to explore a little bit the transient

and the ephemeral nature of this temporary storage.

Let's then switch to the terminal here and let's apply our file.

You can pass the file or the entire directory here.

Doesn't really matter.

And then we should that we should get eventually here that our pod is up and running.

That's looking good if we also describe the pod.

So if we describe the pod empty or demo then we will see here that under the volume section we have

a temporary storage of type empty dir.

The medium is not set.

The size limit is also not set.

And if we scroll up a little bit more in the container section, we will see here that there is a mounts

section which specifies also our temporary storage with the container ready and able to work properly.

Then we can now SSH or let's exec into the container.

So we're going to run kubectl exec dash it and we will pass.

Now the pod here.

So the name of the pod is empty dir demo.

And then we'll pass dash dash.

And what we would like to exec in this pod here is going to be the shell command.

So the moment we do that we now have a new shell here.

And we can change directory.

So let's change into our user share demo or temp not demo.

Oops temp like so.

So as you can see the directory exists here but there is nothing present in the directory.

So if we remove the a here, we will see that there is no actual directory present here.

We can just create a new file.

So let's say echo hello from temp storage.

And we will just dump these results here into the demo dot.

TXT file.

So we can now confirm that the file exists here.

That's looking good.

And if we were to now exit the container here and let's exit once again we can as always just get the

contents of the file.

So usr share temp and then cat here the demo dot txt content so that we can see that the file is actually

stored here and it still exists.

If this container here were to be restarted, but the pod were not to be recreated, then the file will

still be available, right?

So the the storage here is bound to the pod lifecycle, not to the container lifecycle.

So if the container for whatever reason gets restarted, then we're still good.

The file will still be available there, but if the pod gets deleted and recreated then the file will

be deleted as well.

We can visualize this by let's run Kubernetes or kubectl delete and we're going to pass the file.

Let's also pass the force here because I believe the sleep command doesn't exit gracefully.

So the file we want to delete is this one empty dir.

So everything is deleted here.

And if we were to now kubectl apply or run kubectl apply with the file once again and then exec into

the container.

So let's do this here once again.

And we were to try to get the contents of usr share temp.

Or actually let's just change into this directory here.

So change usr share temp.

Then we can confirm here that the file doesn't really exist anymore.

So if the pod gets recreated then once again whatever storage, whatever is stored under the empty dir

volume will be deleted.

Just keep that in mind.

Doesn't mean we should not use it, just simply means that we should be aware of this and the use cases

for when ephemeral storage is helpful.

One of these use cases is when we want to actually share data across containers.

Let's say that this container here or the first container is, let's say creating some logs.

And then we want to retrieve these logs and process these logs and then export these logs with a second

container, maybe a sidecar pattern here where the first container is not responsible for processing

the logs, it just generates logs.

And then the second container will do this processing.

So before we create the the new container here, let's just come back to the terminal and let's delete

everything we have.

So in the terminal here we will run kubectl delete once again.

And now let's come back to the IDE.

And let's now start creating our second container.

So we're going to keep things very simple here I'm just going to create another BusyBox container which

will be let's say the second.

So this one here can be the empty the writer.

And the second one here can be the empty the reader.

And let's now say that we want only the writer here to be able to actually write to the contents of

this volume here, and the reader should be able to only read from that.

So we can also specify the read only option here and set that to true.

And this will make sure that the the empty reader here is only able to retrieve the contents, but not

really to write to this volume.

So the process for defining a volume mount here.

So as you can see the empty the writer stays the same.

Now we would like to also mount this volume in another container.

So the name here has to be the same right.

The name has to be the same as this volume.

But the mount path here can actually differ.

So let's just say here instead of mounting instead of user share temp, we're just going to mount this

inside of forward slash temp like so.

So we will see that it is perfectly fine to use a different mount path.

It simply means that the contents of this volume here will be visible under two different paths, depending

on the container you are on.

For the reader, one is going to be forward slash temp for the writer one oops.

For the writer one it will be forward slash user forward slash share forward slash temp.

That's perfect.

So let's save this here.

And let's come back to the terminal now to take our new updates here for a spin in the terminal.

Let's just clear everything here.

And now we're going to apply once again our file.

So kubectl apply the file.

And we can see that the pod was correctly created.

We can also confirm that both of the containers are up and running here.

And if we were to describe the pod then we would also get that we have the the single volume.

So we have a single volume here the temporary storage.

And also we have this kube API access.

But this is something that's managed by the system.

So we have the temporary storage here.

And then we have the amount within the reader.

So let's have a look here that is empty the reader.

Correct.

So this has the volume mount here.

And you can see that this is read only.

Right.

So Kubernetes already identifies that this is read only.

And if we have a look at our previous one this is read write.

Great.

So let's now have a look at how we can work with this containers here.

So if we were to let's first of all try to exec into our reader here or actually let's check into our

writer.

So now we have two containers inside of the pod.

And this is probably something I believe we haven't come across so far in the course.

But this is a great moment for us to explore that whenever we have two containers, we do need to specify

which or two or more containers.

We do need to specify which container we wish to exec into, and that's done via the dash C flag, and

then simply passing the name of the container.

In our case that is empty der writer like so.

So let's start with the writer.

We will exec into the writer.

We will change into the user share temp directory.

And now we're just going to echo here.

Hello from empty dir writer.

And we will simply echo this into the hello dot.

TXT file.

We can now exit this and let's exec now into our reader.

So let's remove writer here.

And now we're going to execute the commands from within the reader.

Let's now change into the forward slash temp directory.

And let's have a look at everything that is available here.

Oops sorry that is not the forward slash temp is forward slash temp like so I believe that's how I wrote

it.

And as you can see we can see here the hello dot.

TXT file.

So we can also retrieve the contents of this file without any problems.

If we were however to try to create something.

So let's say hello from empty dir The reader, and we were to try to actually create this.

Hello reader.

Dot.

TXT file like so.

Then we will see that we get an error.

So we cannot create the file.

Because this is a read only file system.

We can also confirm here that we have only read permissions.

So this is one way for us to stay a little bit on the safer side.

If we want containers to just retrieve information, we can set the read only flag to true.

And that will ensure that these containers are not able to edit or modify the contents of the volume,

they are just able to retrieve them.

Perfect.

So that's it for our discussion around the empty Dir volume.

And once again, this is an ephemeral volume.

So you should keep in mind keep that in mind when using it and making sure that it actually matches

your needs and you are not going to suffer, or there will be no problems if this data gets deleted.

Let's delete everything that we have here, and let's then take a short break and I'll see you in the

next lecture.

Great.

Before we dive deeper into working with local volumes, let's just discuss persistent volume claims

because they come into the picture.

Now, whenever we want to work with local volumes, and they will also be useful for working with a

variety of different volumes.

Good.

So persistent volume claims is what allows us to claim the robust storage and actually use them in pods.

We cannot use persistent volumes directly in pods.

We need to go via claims.

So the claims here, the persistent volume claims are actually what reserves the persistent volume.

So here PV stands for persistent volume.

Or that creates and reserves a PV.

And this really boils down to whether we are using static provisioning the PV.

The persistent volume must exist beforehand.

But when we are using dynamic provisioning then it might not exist beforehand.

It doesn't have to.

It can also be created as a result of a claim being created.

So claims are bound to a single persistent volume.

Very important here.

That's a 1 to 1 relationship, or many to one is not one to many, it is 1 to 1.

If a persistent volume is bound to a claim, then it cannot be bound to any other claim.

And if we have a persistent volume that has ten gigabytes and the claim needs only one gigabyte, then

there will be nine gigabytes of excess storage in this persistent volume that cannot be used by other

claims.

This is very important to keep in mind.

And that's where and this particularly important for static provisioning.

Right.

So dynamic provisioning would look at the request from the claim and it would create volumes according

to this request.

So it's less of an issue.

But when we are using static, when we are creating the persistent volumes beforehand, then this is

something we should be mindful of.

So we can specify.

We can set specific criteria in a claim so that only the persistent volumes that match this criteria

are considered for binding.

And also, let's once again remind ourselves that we should be mindful of the possibility for extra

unused capacity, particularly with static provisioning.

So there are a couple of reclamation policies once a claim is deleted.

Basically, Kubernetes needs to answer the question what happens with the persistent volume.

Right.

So we used to have this recycle here that's currently deprecated.

And dynamic provisioning is encouraged.

As you might imagine recycle here is really just scraping removing the data and making the persistent

volume available.

Once again we have retain here to begin with.

So retain will retain the volume.

It will not delete the volume.

So if the persistent volume is dynamically provisioned and we set retain as the reclamation policy here.

Then if the claim gets deleted, the volume will still be maintained.

And we can either have a look at the data, clean the data ourselves, I don't know, but we can just

retain the volume.

We also have the possibility of deleting the volume.

And this is the default right?

So when we dynamically provision things and the claim gets deleted, it is only natural that hey, we

are going to go and delete the volume as well so that we can also save some costs.

We don't have unused volumes.

There are also a couple of access modes that might be interesting, so read the write once the volume

can be mounted as read, write by a single node.

So node is the keyword here and not pods right.

So a volume can still be used by any number of pods, any number of pods within that node.

But it can be mounted as read write by a single node.

Read only many.

Here the volume can be mounted as read only by many nodes.

We have read write many.

The volume can be mounted as read write by many nodes, and we have also a newer one which is read write

once pod and the volume can be mounted as read write by a single pod.

So basically if we want to restrict a volume to be used by a single pod, then in our persistent volume

claim here we would specify that the access mode is read.

Write one spot.

If we specify only read write once, then there is no guarantee that only a single pod will use that

volume.

Great.

So just to summarize here, static versus dynamic provisioning.

So static is really best effort match based on access mode and size requests.

So when we create our volume claim we can say what's the access mode we want and how much size we would

like.

And then static provisioning is going to look at the existing persistent volumes and it's going to try.

A best effort match might not be fulfilled depending on what's available.

So if we ask for something that is read, write once with five gigabytes.

But there is only persistent volumes that are read, write once with two gigabytes, then this new claim

will never be fulfilled.

So we create the persistent volumes first.

We then create a persistent volume claim which will hopefully find, hopefully find a matching persistent

volume.

And then the pods can use this persistent volume claim to actually mount the volume within containers.

Now over to dynamic provisioning.

In dynamic provisioning, the storage is provisioned dynamically when persistent volume claims are created,

and if the backend supports what's requested, then this will always be fulfilled, right?

So as long as there is space and you can think here, cloud storage is most of the time advertised as

infinite storage space.

So space is not going to be an issue as long as the adopted solution also supports the specified access

mode, then the volumes, the persistent volumes will be created automatically.

And we don't need to do that manually.

So here we first create the persistent volume claim.

And then this is going to lead to the creation of the persistent volume behind the scenes.

And if we create a new claim then this will also create a new persistent volume.

And then the pods can use this persistent volume claims.

And just to highlight we can have pods here using persistent volume claims backed by both static provisioning

and dynamic provisioning.

That's fine right.

So pods can use multiple persistent volume claims here.

And if they are backed by either static or dynamic provisioning, this from the pods perspective doesn't

really matter.

All right.

Amazing.

So hopefully the concepts are clear to you.

Let's then take a short break and come back in the next lecture.

Hello and welcome back.

Let's now explore persistent volumes and persistent volume claims by using the local volume.

This is a persistent volume, so it's not ephemeral like the empty door.

And it will give us enough for us to explore the main topics around how to create a persistent volume,

and how to create a persistent volume claim, and how we use that also within pods.

So let's start by just making sure that we have no resources in the default namespace.

If you have any other pods you're running, that's also not too bad, but I'm just starting with a clean

slate.

A small warning here.

I want to show you an error that we can very commonly come across.

So I'm not going to do the necessary setup now in the minikube side to begin with.

That's on purpose.

We're going to create all the resources.

And then we will see which kind of error comes up.

And we will see what are the the necessary requirements, what are the conditions that must be fulfilled

for us to be able to use the local volume.

And let's start creating our new file here.

I'm just going to use local volume like so.

And or we can also say local volume for example.

And then here we will create a couple of resources.

The first one will be our persistent volume.

So the API version once again is V1 here.

And the kind will be a persistent persistent volume like so.

You will see that this will already auto populate with some options here.

And we can actually delete.

Let's just delete here.

Most of them.

We're just going to leverage this here and didn't really help much.

So maybe if you just want to skip the templating that's also good.

So the name here will simply say local volume.

And under this back here we will start by specifying a few things.

So first thing is the capacity of our volume and the storage here.

Let's say we're going to set this to one GB byte like so.

And you can set to more to less depending how much you have available in minikube, the volume mode.

Here is another thing that we would set.

And this is going to be a file system volume.

If you have any doubts about any of these options, then you can always hover over them to get a little

bit more information.

Right.

So if you're not sure about what this volume mode means here, if you hover over this, then you will

see whether this or you see the explanation that this will define whether this volume is intended to

be a formatted file system or just a raw block state.

The file system here is implied.

So if we do not specify volume mode, it will default.

It will default to file system.

And this is once again normally the use case you come across.

You use volumes to manage files rather than just keeping them in raw block state.

But you can still set this to block in case you have that use case.

The access modes here we will specify a single one.

So this is an array.

So it's a list.

And we will specify read write once here so that this volume can be mounted in or by a single node.

And that makes sense because this is basically just a directory inside of the node.

Right.

So we just specify here access modes to read write once.

So we can also specify the reclaim policy.

Here we can say persistent volume reclaim policy like so.

And there are a couple of values that we can use.

We can set this to retain.

So if this persistent volume is deleted the data will be retained here.

So basically this defines what happens when the volume is released from its claim.

Right.

So it's not when the persistent volume is deleted itself, but it's when the claim is deleted.

And then as you can see here, the valid options are retain delete and recycle.

We also discussed that we don't need to specify this here.

So the retained one is is the default for manually created persistent volumes, and the delete is the

default for dynamically provisioned persistent volumes.

So if we remove that here, this will be the default for us because this is a manually created persistent

volume.

We can also leave this here.

Now the important thing for us to set is the storage class name here.

And this will be local storage right.

So this will be what we will use in the persistent volume claim afterwards to look for this specific

storage class or for this specific persistent volume.

We will then also set a local option here.

And we will set the path that we will mount inside of the node.

And we could simply say here let's say mount.

And then we're going to add disks and let's say here temp or let's say local volume.

Let's say local one like so.

Just so that we could potentially create more local volumes.

Important thing is that this path here.

It should already exist inside of the node, and we have not created this path yet.

And I want to show you which kind of error we will get if this path doesn't exist.

But just keep in mind that eventually we will have to create this inside of the node so that everything

works as expected.

Now, whenever we create a new local volume here, which is specified by this local option here, then

you can see that this represents directly attached storage with node affinity.

So now we need to specify a node affinity option here or configuration because once again this is mounted

in the node.

And we might have multiple nodes.

So pods that use this volume here they should be scheduled in the node where this volume is actually

created.

Because otherwise there would be some issues here when trying to access the data from within the volume.

Let's say that we have a node one and two, and then only node one has this actual path here.

So if the pods were to be scheduled in node two, they would not work as expected for that, to ensure

that we are actually scheduling nodes in the correct or scheduling pods, sorry.

In the correct node we will specify the node affinity option here, and then we'll say required.

And then we will say here node selector terms.

And this will be a list of selector terms.

So we can specify multiple multiple conditions here.

And we'll simply say that for the first one we'll say match expressions.

So once again our expressions here are coming into play.

And the key that we will look for is kubernetes.io/hostname.

And let me just show you where we get this information from.

So back in the terminal here let's get all our nodes right.

So I just want to clarify where we are getting that information from.

And if you have started minikube with more nodes you will have more nodes here.

So just pick one of them.

We're going to use minikube here.

I'm going to say kubectl describe describe node.

And then we will pass the minikube node name here.

And now we get all the information of the node.

So if we scroll up you can see here the capacity as well.

This might be useful.

How much CPU how much memory this node has.

It's a lot of stuff here.

And this is also coming from the system because we didn't specify anything when we created the node.

So let's scroll up a little bit more.

Or actually we didn't create the node.

We didn't specify anything when we created our minikube cluster.

Minikube is just taking some defaults from behind the scenes.

So this important thing here under labels you will find the Kubernetes IO forward slash hostname.

And this is the one that we are looking for.

We could also go for another one which is this minikube.k.io/name.

And it's really up to you.

Here they are both the same.

But if it comes to the situation where one of them actually has the information you want and the other

one doesn't, then just feel free to pick any of this.

So that's where I'm getting this information from, and I'm just using the match expressions here to

show you another use case for this.

So let's come back to the IDE.

The key is then the host name the operator will be in.

And then the values here will simply be a single value.

We're going to simply say minikube like so right.

So this is what we need to set here for our volume.

Or actually not only what we need to set, but also some useful defaults here for us to explore how

we can actually work with this volume or how we can configure it.

All right.

So let's save this.

Let's come back to the terminal.

And let's see here.

Let's clear the screen.

So and let's see what we can do or what happens here once we apply the file local vol example.

And then we can also get our volumes.

So kubectl get volume we're going to oops sorry.

That should be persistent volume.

That's looking good.

And as you can see here we have a few things.

And there is nothing really saying here that there was any kind of error.

Maybe we can describe this volume.

So kubectl describe and a shorthand here is PV right.

Instead of us having to write persistent volume all the time.

And then we will simply say here local dash volume like so at the moment we do that here, we will simply

see the information that we have provided.

We didn't provide any labels nor annotations.

And as you can see here, there is nothing saying that this was not successfully created.

So the source is here.

We didn't get any errors.

It might look good for us.

Let's then continue with now the persistent volume claim.

So back in the IDE here let's create a new resource.

And that's going to be the persistent volume claim.

The API version will also be v1, and the kind here will be persistent volume claim.

And now let's just remove the duplication here, and let's have a look at the fields that were created

for us.

So the first one metadata here we are already familiar with I'm just going to write local volume claim

like so.

And now we have a few things here.

We have the resources.

We have the volume mode.

We have access modes.

And we can start using this to specify the conditions, the requests that we wish here for this persistent

volume claim.

Kubernetes will then take this conditions, and it will look for a volume that satisfies them to a in

a best effort basis here, or if it is also possible to to dynamically provision the volume, then Kubernetes

will also do so.

So basically this means hey give me a volume that has this criteria, this characteristics here.

And if you cannot find one and you can dynamically provision one, then please provision it.

Otherwise we will get an error.

Right.

So let's try to get an error here.

Let's say that we want a volume with two GB bytes.

Remember that our volume here has a storage capacity of one GB right.

So we're going to have two GB bytes.

The volume mode is file system.

This is matching here.

That's no problem.

The access modes is also matching.

We have read write once here.

That's great.

And now we can also specify the storage storage class name like so for local storage.

So that we look only for the persistent volumes that have this storage class name also set to local

storage.

All right.

So this will give us an error.

It's not going to be able to find any volume that matches the resource requests here.

So let's save this.

Let's come back to the terminal And let's now apply once again.

So kubectl apply local volume example.

And then we'll see that the volume is unchanged and the volume claim has been created.

We can now inspect our persistent volume claims here.

And you will see that the volume claim will be in a pending state.

So if Kubernetes cannot find nor dynamically provision a volume that matches the criteria specified

in the claim, we will enter into a pending state.

If we were to describe this PVC here, then we will see that once again, we have the message here that

the provisioning failed.

Now it's a little bit weird because it simply saying storage class here not found.

But actually this is because we are not able to find a volume that is matching the conditions that we

have specified.

Let's then come back here to our IDE and let's change the request to one GB byte.

That's the only thing we will do.

We're going to come back here to the terminal.

We will apply the changes here once again and let's have a look.

So this is forbidden.

So we cannot really make this change here.

So we need to actually delete everything kubectl delete.

And let's pass the file here local volume example.

And let's then recreate that like so if we were to now get our persistent volume claims here, we will

see that the status is now bound.

So it was able to actually find and match the capacity and the storage class as well here.

And as you can see, the error message that we got a little bit before, it was quite cryptic because

it was kind of hinting that the problem was with the local storage storage class, but in reality,

the problem was that the volume or the the requested capacity was not matching any of the volumes that

were currently existing.

If we also get our persistent volumes here, we will also see that there is a status of off bound here.

So this status here bound it shows that the volume is taken.

Let's say it's bound to a specific persistent volume claim.

Let's describe here.

Let's see.

We can also have a look at the claim here.

So we don't even need to describe.

Right.

So we can see that the claim is here.

And it is showing which claim is actually using this persistent volume.

Now once again the relationship between persistent volumes and persistent volume claims it's a 1 to

1 relationship.

That means if a claim or if a persistent volume is bound to a claim, it cannot be bound to another

claim.

All right.

I believe that the lecture is getting a little bit longer than I expected.

We still have to create this local directory here in our node.

And we would like to also set up a pod to see how everything is going to work.

But since we are already extending the discussion for a little bit longer than I planned, let's take

a quick break and let's come back in the next lecture.



Hello and welcome back.

Let's continue with the implementation.

Here.

We can confirm that we have our persistent volume and our persistent volume claim, both available here,

and that the claim is bound and that the volume is also bound.

The name of the claim is local volume claim.

This is something that we will need to use when we create the pod.

Let's then jump to the IDE and I'll continue here in the local volume file.

So let's just create a new resource here.

And that's going to be a simple pod.

We're going to say Apiversion V1 kind pod.

And we're just going to go with the autocomplete here.

And we will say local volume example.

Right.

So or just local volume pod can be like so let's remove the duplication here.

We will also use the same image that we have used for the empty dir.

So I'm just going to copy here the container.

So I'm just going to copy the whole thing except for the volume here.

Let's copy this.

Let's paste this in the specification here.

And let's remove the volume mount as well as the additional container that we have created.

So in the end here we should have just a single container.

And we're going to put here let's say local volume.

We will use the image BusyBox.

We will run the shell command sleep so that we have a bit of time to play around with this.

And this is the definition of our pod.

The process for using a persistent volume is exactly the same, in the sense that we will also define

the volume here under the volumes section of the pod, and then we will mount this volume somewhere

in our container.

So this follows the exact same structure as this definition here.

It's just a different configuration or a different object schema when we are using a persistent volume

claim.

So we're just going to call this the local volume.

Or let's just add like this local volume.

And then the difference here is that we will not create an empty Dir configuration, we will rather

create a persistent persistent volume claim configuration, and this will specify the claim name here,

which will be the name of our persistent volume claim.

If we scroll up a little bit, we can just copy the metadata here and let's paste it here.

So as you can see we now were able to access this volume here via the local volume claim.

And we will then have access to the underlying persistent volume.

Now that we have declared the volume here in the pod configuration, we can add this to the volume mount

section of our container definition.

And then once again this is at the container level.

And all we have to do is just once again, as you already know, we will reference the name of the volume.

That's going to be the same as what is specified here that really needs to match the name of the volume.

Similarly to the empty dir.

And we will specify the mount Path and in this case here since our directory.

Let's have a look here.

Since our directory is mount disks let's just use then here for the slash mount forward slash local

like so.

And I believe there is a small typo here.

So let's just remove this additional H.

And we are good to go.

Now this from the configuration perspective we are good to go.

But remember we still have not created this path here in our node.

That means we will run into an error when we try to mount this volume here.

And that's what I want to show you.

So let's save this.

Let's come back to the terminal.

Let's clear the screen and let's run kubectl apply.

Let's apply the local volume example.

We will see that the pod here has been created.

So let's now get the pods kubectl get pod.

And you will see that it is still in container creating.

And even if we were to wait a bit more here, it will be stuck in the container creating error and it

will eventually start erroring out.

So what we can do here is we can describe this pod.

Kubectl describe pod.

Let's paste it here.

And as you can see we already get an a failed mount reason here.

An event of type warning.

And we can see that the initialization failed for this local volume because the path does not exist.

So it tried to find this path in the node.

It could not find this path in the node.

And then the initialization failed.

If we have a look at the pods once again we will see that we are just stuck at container creating.

So let's now delete here our pod.

So kubectl delete pod and we will delete just the pod.

We're not going to delete the persistent volume nor the persistent volume claim.

Let's just delete the pod here.

And let's now create this path in our minikube host.

So let's just once again confirm that we get a node with minikube name.

And let's now SSH into this node by running minikube SSH.

This will then land us inside of the node.

And we can now perform operations here.

So I would like to create this directory and we need to add sudo here.

So let's run this commands as sudo make directory.

And since we are creating a nested directory here let's add the dash p flag and then pass the directory

name.

And I also would like to change the mode to allow everything in this directory.

And that's all we need to do really.

So we can now exit from this.

So these are the two commands that we need to do basically just to prepare this node here for the local

volume.

If we were to just list what is inside of this folder by changing the directory into here, oops.

Let's change into mount disks and then local one.

And we can confirm that the directory exists but there is nothing inside it.

Let's then exit this.

And this will also clear the screen for us.

And we can now run the kubectl apply command once again.

And we will confirm that the pod has been created.

And if we were now to get our pods kubectl get pod.

We can confirm that the pod is in a running state.

So it was possible to find the the local directory.

And as you can see here, we did not need to recreate neither the volume nor the volume claim.

Now that we have the pod here up and running, we can exec into the pod by running kubectl exec dash

it.

Since it has only one container, we can pass the just the name of the pod.

And let's now execute a shell.

Or let's start a shell inside of this container, and we can just remember the path where this is mounted

is inside mount forward slash local.

Right.

So this is different than the path in the node which is mount disks local one.

This is just local like so because we have specified in our volume mounts section.

So let's now just echo hello from pod into a hello dot.

TXT file.

If we now have a look at the contents of the directory.

Oops like So then we can confirm that this is here.

That's perfect.

Let's now exit this and let's run minikube.

SSH.

Once again, let's now change into the mount disks local one like so.

And if we now have a look at the files here, we can see that the file was created inside of this directory.

So this is great.

Now any other pod or container would be able to access this file, as long as they also have the persistent

volume in their definitions.

If we were to now exit here, and just the last thing I want to show you, let's delete our pod.

That's going to be local volume pod.

And if it takes a little bit too much you can also add a dash dash force here just to make it faster.

Let's now apply this once again the local example.

It's going to create a new pod.

We can exec into this pod once again.

And we can now confirm that if we were to print the contents of Mount Local and Hello.txt, we can confirm

that the contents of the file are still there, even though the pod was deleted and recreated.

This was not the case with the empty dir, because the empty dir volume was bound to the pod lifecycle.

That means deleting the pod deletes also the data.

That's great.

Let's now exit from this pod, and let's come back to the IDE.

And let's here create another pod.

So we're going to create not an additional container inside of the pod.

But this is going to be an entirely new pod which will be our new or local volume pod two.

Right.

So this is just going to be a completely new pod.

And we will also mount this local volume here under the Or with the local volume claim.

Also mount this into our Mount Local.

But now we can say let's say for example local two.

So we have now two pods which are using the same persistent volume claim.

They are then effectively getting Ahold of the same data behind the scenes, and we're just mounting

it in a different path inside of the container of our second pod.

Let's save this.

Let's come back to the terminal.

Here, let's run kubectl apply once again so that we create our a new pod two.

And now if we were to exec into this pod two so kubectl exec.

Now that's going to be local volume pod two.

We can confirm that if we were to print the contents here of Mount Local two forward slash.

Hello dot txt the contents of the file are also there.

That's great.

So we were able to effectively decouple storage from the pod and container lifecycle.

As you can see, the files or the contents that are created by the pods and their respective containers

inside of this persistent volume, they are reflected across pods and also outside of the pod altogether.

When we want to have a look at the contents of our Kubernetes node, let's then exit this here.

I believe that's a great moment for us to take a short break and let's come back in the next lecture.


Hello and welcome back.

Let's explore a little bit.

What happens when we delete the persistent volume claims and persistent volumes that we have created?

So let's start by deleting here.

So let's have a look at all that we have.

So kubectl get pod pv pvc.

And we will get all the things that we have here.

We have two pods.

We have one persistent volume and one persistent volume claim.

Let's clear the screen.

And let's start by deleting the pods.

Kubectl delete pod local volume example and local volume volume.

Example two.

Example two.

Like so.

And we will also pass a force flag here.

And that's going to delete both pods for us.

Oops I believe that this should be local volume pod and not example.

Sorry for that.

Let's have a look.

Local volume pod.

Local volume example.

Local volume pod.

Looks better.

Great.

So the pods are deleted.

Let's now delete our persistent volume claim with cube CTL delete PVC.

And that's going to be local volume claim like so.

And remember the policy that we set here in our IDE in the definition for our persistent volume is the

retain policy.

This is also the default for manually created persistent volumes.

So if we come back to the terminal and we get the persistent volume here, then we can see that the

persistent volume is still existing.

It is retained.

And now the status changed to released.

Now this doesn't mean that the the persistent volume can be reused in other claims.

And so now here if we were to let's have a look if we can apply once again the local volume example.

And as you can see here it says that the local volume claim has been created.

But when we have a look at the persistent volume then we still get the status released.

And if we have a look once again, let's add here the persistent volume claim.

We will see that this persistent volume claim is in a status of pending.

So it cannot be reclaimed.

It cannot be reused.

Whenever the policy here is retained, then the administrator would have to come and do some manual

work here to maybe clean up this volume and then potentially recreate it.

So the idea is that whenever you use the retain policy, the status of the persistent volume will be

released if the persistent volume claim is deleted, but it will not be automatically reused by newer

volume claims by newer persistent volume claims.

Even if the criteria even if the conditions here they match what the volume or they match the volume

characteristics.

Naturally, if we have a look at minikube SSH here, we can also get the contents of our file.

So mount disks, then local one, and then we will have hello.txt.

The file is still there, right?

So deleting the volume claim and recreating the volume claim.

It doesn't delete the underlying files if the policy is retained.

So the persistent volume will stay there and it will not be deleted.

Let's then exit this.

Let's now have a look at what happens when we delete everything.

So we're just going to delete with a force here.

And we will pass the local local volume example like so that's going to delete everything including

the persistent volume.

So now we have no persistent volumes found here.

But let's have a look at whether the files were actually persisted in our minikube or in our node here

in Kubernetes.

So let's run minikube SSH.

And then we can now have a look at whether the mount disks forward slash local one exists.

It does exist.

And if we list the contents here, the file is still available, right?

So even deleting the persistent volume here doesn't mean that the files will be deleted from your local

directory.

That means you could potentially recreate everything and get access to these files by newer pods.

If you were using a dynamically provisioned persistent volumes, then the default policy here that is

specified under the Reclaim the reclaim policy is to delete, and that is then dependent on how the

configuration of the persistent volume works.

Because if the underlying storage mechanism, let's say that you're using an EBS backed or an EFS backed

here for the dynamic provisioning.

And this is in AWS.

Right.

So elastic block storage that's a typical SSD drive.

And elastic file storage that is a network file system.

If the configuration is then to delete the underlying storage here that was dynamically provisioned

then yes, the contents of this persistent volume will also be deleted, but this can all be configured,

and it would also go a little bit beyond the scope of this discussion around local volumes.

So for us here is just good to know that even after deleting the volumes, the files will be present

here.

We can remove everything from the directory if we wish to clean it up to reuse it as a new clean volume,

but otherwise the files will still be available.

Great.

Let's then exit from our from our minikube node.

And I believe that's a great moment for us.

To take a short break, let's just confirm that we have nothing here PVC, PVC and pod.

I believe they are all gone.

That's perfect.

There are no resources found.

So that's it for our discussion around using local volumes.

They are very useful for local development in case you want to test persistent volumes and working with

more persistent data.

So just keep them in mind.

Let's then take a short break and I'll see you in the next lecture.



Minikube also offers a very simple storage driver and a storage class that allows us to dynamically

provision persistent volumes.

I would like to dedicate a few minutes to explore this with you, because the mechanics here, the process

will be very similar to whenever you are working with a dynamically provisioned persistent volumes backed

by different providers.

So the way for us to see what minikube offers is to start with kubectl get storage class and the storage

class that is created by minikube by default.

Here is this storage class called standard.

This storage class is then used by minikube to create or to dynamically provision a hostpath backed

volume.

We have discussed in the past that Hostpath is not really the best option, and the recommendation from

Kubernetes is to use local instead of hostpath.

However, local does not provide dynamically dynamic provisioning and Hostpath does so minikube offers

this option to us.

It is good enough for us to explore.

It will give us enough things to play around.

So let's describe this storage class to begin with, and we'll simply run kubectl describe storage class

standard.

That is the name of the storage class here.

And then once we do that we will get some information.

And what we can see here that is the name.

And then there is this is default class.

This is marked to yes here.

And this is coming from the annotations.

Let's have a look here.

There should be somewhere perfect here.

Annotations.

Storage class.

Kubernetes is default class true.

That means that whenever we create a persistent volume claim without a storage class, it will default

to using this storage class.

Here you can see now that there is a provisioner here, and this provisioner is responsible behind the

scenes for dynamically creating our persistent volume.

So all we need to do here is to create a persistent volume claim which either does not specify the storage

class name altogether, or that it specifies the storage class name as standard.

We then create this persistent volume claim, and we will see that the persistent volume will be created

behind the scenes and automatically for us.

So in our IDE under the same folder storage persistence.

Let's create a new file here and we will say dynamic dot YAML.

So now here we're just going to create a simple persistent volume claim.

So I'm just going to copy this actually from something else that we already have here I'm opening the

local volume example.

Let's copy this persistent volume claim and then let's paste this here.

So remember from our previous discussions we have always specified the storage class name here to match

the storage class that we have defined in our persistent volume.

So we create the storage class name here that was called local storage.

And then we used the same storage class name here in our persistent volume claim, and that's how we

were able to bind the claim to the respective volume.

Now we are not going to specify this.

We will simply leave this configuration as it is.

And let's change the name here.

We're going to call this dynamic example like so or dynamic PV example.

And let's save this.

Let's come back to the terminal now and let's apply our file.

So kubectl apply dynamic dot YAML.

And you will see that the persistent volume claim dynamic PV example has been created.

We can now get our persistent volume claims.

And we will see that it is already bound right.

So before it used to stay in a pending state, if it did not find a matching persistent volume.

However, you can see that this one here is already bound and there is already a volume that has been

created for us.

So let's inspect this volume that was created for us.

Let's run kubectl describe persistent volume and let's paste the volume ID and as you can see here,

we get all the information.

So it was created or it was provisioned by here the minikube hostpath provisioner that we have seen.

And it also has which path it is mounting behind the scenes in the host.

So any data that we save into this, into this persistent volume here, whenever we mount it as a volume

mount inside of a container, this data will be available for us inside of this directory.

I'm going to split the screen here just for us to SSH into minikube.

And let's have a look at this directory.

So let's change into temp hostpath provisioner default like so.

And then once we list the directories here we will see that our directory is present here.

Now the question is what happens when we delete this persistent volume claim.

So let's scroll up a little bit here.

You will see that the reclaim policy is set to delete.

That means whenever we delete the persistent volume claim, the persistent volume itself will also be

deleted.

So let's run the delete command kubectl delete with dynamic YAML file.

The persistent volume claim has been deleted.

Let's now run kubectl get persistent volumes and we will see that the volume is not available anymore.

If we list the directories here under our original path, we can also see that our data is gone.

Right?

So the the idea here is that the delete reclaim policy, it is deleting everything, including the persistent

volume and the path that was saving the data.

So this is a destructive operation.

That means if you are storing some data that should not be deleted, you should not use the delete reclaim

policy.

You might also be wondering why is the reclaim policy delete here?

Because the as we saw before, the default value that was passed for us was retained whenever we were

using the statically provisioned, persistent volumes.

As it turns out, with dynamically provisioned persistent volumes, the default policy is delete.

And that makes sense because we run into the risk of creating a lot of volumes and of having a lot of

storage not used afterwards.

If we do not delete these volumes, let's clear the screen.

And if you wanted to change the reclaim policy here, then what you would have to do is you would have

to touch the storage class.

So let's let's get the storage class standard here.

And let's have a look at the reclaim policy is here.

So if we were to also get the storage class standard and then output as a YAML, then you will see that

the reclaim policy is set to delete.

If we were to change this to retain in the storage class definition, then all the volumes created dynamically

via this this storage class they would have the reclaim policy also set to retain.

I'm not going to change that here because this is not something that we are managing actively.

This is something that comes with minikube.

So I'm just going to leave the default values.

But just keep that in mind that if you want to retain your dynamically provisioned, persistent volumes,

then you need to set a reclaim policy to retain at the storage class definition level.

Coming back quickly to the IDE, just to reiterate, we have been able to create the persistent volume

dynamically because we did not specify the storage class name, but we could also specify the storage

class name standard like so.

And this is the name that we get here.

Right.

So that's the name here.

And that's the one that we should use whenever we want to use this storage class.

If we were to then run here once again kubectl apply and then let's apply our dynamic file.

Then we should also see that immediately our folder is back.

And we can also confirm that the persistent volume has been created and is bound.

Perfect.

So let's then delete.

And by the way here just to just as a highlight or just as a small comment, if you do try to delete

the persistent volume and the name of the persistent volume is this one here.

If you try to delete the persistent volume, you will see that it's not going to work until the persistent

volume claim is deleted.

So let's exit here from minikube and we can confirm that.

Let's have a look here at the persistent volumes that we have.

And you will see that it is stuck in terminated.

If we were to describe this persistent volume and the name of the persistent volume here, it is quite

long.

So I'm just going to copy paste.

There are no events and there are no information here informing us that this is waiting for the persistent

volume claim to be deleted.

So let's just come to the folder here.

This is a new directory.

So I'm just going to change into the storage persistent folder.

And then from within this folder we are just going to delete here our dynamic file or the resources

created.

And the moment we deleted the persistent volume claim.

Then you can see here that the process has already completed at the top.

So it's just important to keep in mind that if you do wish to delete.

A persistent volume, you do need to delete the persistent volume claim that is bound to.

It before you are able to delete that volume.

Awesome.

So great discussion here around dynamic provisioning.

This is useful in many cases so that we also don't need to SSH into minikube and create the folders

beforehand.

So minikube is taking care of all this for us.

It does make our lives easier.

And this is also normally the path that you would follow.

Not with a hostpath provisioner, but rather with any cloud based or any third party provisioner to

actually create your volumes and store the data.

Behind the scenes.

But that would normally be the path that you would follow when working with Kubernetes in production

environments.

Let's then just confirm here that we have deleted everything so we can get persistent volumes and persistent

volume claims.

There is nothing in our cluster.

We're good to go.

Let's then take a short break and I'll see you in the next lecture.



Whenever we talk about persistent storage and needing some state in our applications, then statefulsets

always come into the discussion in Kubernetes because they do provide some guarantees.

They do provide some features around stability and pod identity that can be useful whenever we need

pods to have state, or whenever we need pods to have a stable identity and access to a stable storage.

Let's discuss Statefulsets then in a little bit more details.

They help us manage stateful applications more efficiently and statefulsets maintain stable identities

for each pod, ensuring that even if the pod is restarted, it will retain its unique identity and the

connection to persistent storage.

So more specifically, what Statefulsets provide is a stable, unique network identity for each pod

created as part of the stateful set.

Also, a consistent and stable persistent storage here associated with it.

Pods.

each pod also across restarts.

That means if your pod is restarted, it will have.

It will have access to the same persistent storage that it had before.

It also guarantees ordered pod creation, scaling and deletion in case this is necessary whenever we

are working, for example with databases or replicated services.

We can specify a persistent volume claim template in the Pod definition file, and as long as this stays

the same so as long as the volume claim.

Claim template stays the same, then the pod will use the same claim and have and have access to the

same data once again, also across restarts.

So each replica in a stateful set will have its own persistent volume claim, so data is not shared

across different replicas.

This is important to highlight.

If you need data to be shared across different replicas, then this is not the way to go.

One of the expectations.

So let's say stateful sets are designed so that each replica, each pod, has its own persistent volume

claim, and it does not share data with other replicas other pods from this stateful set.

Another thing to keep in mind is that the persistent volumes, they are not deleted automatically when

a replica when a pod is deleted, so you would have to go and manually delete them here.

The pod names and their network identities are also stable, and they will follow the following pattern.

So there will be the stateful set name here, and then a dash and some ordinal index that is increasing.

So we would have let's say pod one or let's say my stateful set zero, my stateful set one, and so

on and so forth.

So we can also use what's called a headless service to expose the pods via more stable domains.

We'll also discuss this in the practical exercises, how we can leverage headless services, what they

are, and how we can use them to expose pods in a stateful set via stable domains or DNS hostnames.

Names.

So just a small quick diagram here to to summarize what we did.

So we have a stateful set here.

Then this stateful set will start the creation of pods in an ordered manner here.

So that's this here.

And the names of the pods will follow the name of the stateful set dash some ordinal index here which

will be increasing.

Now all of this is coupled bound together.

That means this pod here will have then its own persistent volume claim, which will be attached to

its own persistent volume.

If this is statically provisioned, then it should be available.

And it should.

There should be a match here.

Right.

So the the persistent volume claim, the conditions here.

The requests that we provide it would ideally find a match in the persistent volume.

Otherwise this can never be fulfilled.

If this is dynamically provisioned then it's easier because based on the persistent volume claim, the

respective persistent volume will be created.

So if this pod gets restarted then it will get attached to the same persistent volume claim and the

same persistent volume.

Once the first pod is up, then the stateful set will create the second one and the third one, and

each one of them will have their own persistent volume claim and persistent volume.

Now the deletion order is going to be different.

Or if we scale in for example, it will be different because it will start the deletion by the latest

one here or by let's say this would be the youngest pod, the one that was created latest.

Right.

So this would be the one, the first one to be deleted.

Once this one is removed, then the second one would be deleted and then the third one would be deleted.

So this ordering here might be useful in some applications, but I do find that the main benefits here

are the stability around network identity and name identity, as well as this consistent and stable

persistent storage which is associated with each pod.

And let's then take a short break before we start practicing, and I'll see you in the next lecture.



Let's now spend a couple of minutes to discuss stateful sets and how we can use them to create stateful

applications.

So remember stateful sets.

They have a few guarantees from the Kubernetes side, and two important guarantees is that their name

will be stable as well as their DNS entries.

That means when we combine them with headless services, we can then obtain a stable DNS that we can

use to reach specific pods within that stateful set, and this was not possible with traditional deployments.

We also get the guarantee that a certain pod will be connected to its persistent volume claim template,

and to the same persistent volume claim behind the scenes.

That means that if the pod gets restarted, gets deleted and recreated for whatever reason, it will

still have access.

It will be automatically connected, it will automatically leverage the same persistent volume claim,

and it will have access to the same data.

So before we get started, let's ssh into minikube here just so that we can create a couple of folders

inside of our node that we will use for our persistent volume claims.

So I'm going to create three folders here.

Let's make three directories.

First one is going to be user or actually let's use the mount here I believe that's the convention we

have been doing disks.

And then let's use statefulset.

Let's s here's S zero.

Let's then create ss one and let's create ss two.

And then we also would like to change here the mode.

Let's add 777 to all of this folder.

So mount disks as s zero.

And we're going to do the same for oops.

We're going to do the same here for one.

And we'll also do the same for two.

Right.

So now we have three folders here.

We can create persistent volumes using each of the folders.

We could also create different persistent volumes, all mounting the same folder here.

But I just want to keep things separate, or at least have the possibility of keeping things separate

for demonstration purposes.

How you structure this?

It really depends on your use case.

If you want multiple pods from your replica set to in the end have access to the same files here, then

you would probably use the same folder.

But if you want them to have independent storage, then you can use independent folders.

And if you are using dynamically provisioned persistent volumes and the back end as well the medium

where it is stored, then whenever you create your persistent volume claim templates, they would in

the end also lead to different persistent volumes being created.

Let's exit this so we are good to go from the minikube side.

Let's now open here a new directory.

So I'm just going to change one directory here.

And I'm going to create a new directory I'm going to call this stateful sets like so.

Let's change into stateful sets so that we have a clean slate to work with.

And let's open this in the IDE of your choice.

That's great.

So now we are inside of the same directory here.

No files.

Let's create then our first stateful set file definition.

And actually for us to create this stateful set we would first need to create the persistent volume.

So let's create a new file called PVS.

And that stands for persistent volumes.

We're just going to create all the persistent volumes in the same file.

So this is really API version here.

So really copy pasting kind of from the previous one.

So I'm just going to come here to the local volume example file that we have.

I'm going to copy the contents here of this file.

And then let's just paste this here.

All right.

So now we have one persistent volume.

We're going to say here the name for this is going to be stateful set zero.

And this will mount in our disks.

Statefulset.

Zero like so.

Let's see what else we need to change here.

So the name of the persistent volume is good.

That's already updated.

We then have one gigabyte file system.

Maybe we could even put 128 maybe bytes just to make sure that we don't consume too much capacity,

even though I think that like nowadays.

That's fine.

Right.

Uh, persistent volume claim reclaim policy.

We can leave set here or we can remove.

Let's remove here for the for the sake of just keeping this file a little bit shorter, the volume mode

we can also remove it will default to file system.

The local path here that we will mount.

That is mount disk SS zero here.

So that's good.

And the node affinity will also be important because we want to make sure that we mount all this inside

of our minikube node.

All right.

So we have one persistent volume here.

And then let's now create another persistent volume here, so let's just add it here.

Persistent volume two.

So that's going to be also the stateful set one one here.

So instead of zero let's say now stateful set one.

And then we will also have a third one.

So let's copy this and let's paste it here.

And let's have now the stateful set to like so and stateful set to as well.

That is looking good.

Unfortunately as I know there is quite a bit of replication here or duplication of code and just a few

things that are changing.

And in reality we wouldn't use just plain Kubernetes for this.

We would probably couple this with helm so that we can dynamically generate the different object definitions

here, while also leveraging helm templates.

Now, one thing that I want to highlight is that with the persistent volumes here, and the persistent

volume claims that we will use in the stateful sets, there is nothing that ultimately guarantees that

SS two will be connected to our third pod in the Statefulset, and that SS one will be connected to

our second pod, and that SS zero will be connected to our first pod.

I just want to highlight that the persistent volume claims they will look for available persistent volumes,

but it doesn't mean that they will be fulfilled in the order here.

Which ordered the Statefulset guarantees refers to actually the order of the pods that they are created,

and also that they are deleted.

So before we get started with defining the statefulset, let's quickly come to the terminal here.

Let's clear the console and let's now run kubectl apply and let's apply our PVS dot YAML.

So I want to make sure that we have three volumes three persistent volumes created.

That's great.

And they are all available right.

So as you can see here, if no persistent volume claim has been bound to a persistent volume, it remains

in the available status.


Let's then create our stateful set definition here.

And I would like to come back actually to the definition of the pods that we had using BusyBox.

So I'm just going to come here to the local volume example.

Once again let's get both the pod and the persistent volume claim, because this might be useful also

for creating our persistent volume claim templates.

Let's save this.

Let's come back to our stateful sets directory and let's just paste it here.

Now we're not going to use this as it is because we will use stateful sets.

But I just want to have an overview of what we have here.

So let's get started with creating our stateful set.

The API version will be APS forward slash v1.

The kind here will be stateful set.

And now we would like to create our metadata.

And the name here will be very straightforward.

It can be anything.

So we're just going to say demo stateful set.

And now in the specifications, we will have a bit more information.

There are a couple of top level fields here, so we can set a service name if we wish to do so.

And that will simply will simply set this to BusyBox.

We can also use or we can also define the number of replicas.

And that's going to be two replicas.

And we should also specify the selector here similar to the deployment.

Basically the stateful set is also managing a set of pods.

So it needs to know which pods it will manage.

We also define the template and we also define what is called a volume claim template.

Right.

So these are the top level fields that we will start defining here.

And they will specify the first one.

The selector is which pods are actually managed by this stateful set.

The template here very similar to how we worked with deployments.

It specifies templates for pods.

The difference here is that the volume claim template.

It also is used by Kubernetes to create volume claims or persistent volume claims automatically.

So this is also something that is new.

And this prevents us from having to create this persistent volume claims manually.

So let's start with the selector.

Here we're going to use match labels and we'll simply use here app.

We're going to call this let's say BusyBox just like so.

And the template here is going to be fairly similar to what we have in our pod.

We're going to copy both the metadata and the specification here.

Let's copy this and let's paste under the template.

And let's now fix a few things right.

So we have spec metadata here.

You can see that this is not really very well aligned.

So let's just fix that.

And that is looking a little bit better.

So now we have a metadata for our pods.

We should not include a name because that's going to be managed by the metadata Name of the stateful

set plus an ordinal index here that will be increasing.

So we will update the labels from name to have the app BusyBox like so.

And then the container here will be just our BusyBox container.

Once again that's the name of the container, not of the any labels or of the stateful set.

This could be anything we wish to use.

We will also sleep for one hour here.

The resources are here and now we can also create our volume mounts.

We're going to use once again a local volume.

And we're going to mount this under forward slash mount forward slash local.

Another thing here is that we don't really have access to the index inside of this definition.

Right.

So now we'll have two stateful sets created via the replicas here.

But we cannot use something like let's say we would like to mount here and then interpolate some kind

of index like.

So this is not currently supported.

So we're not gonna change that.

We're just going to leave the Mount local like so now we will not specify volumes here.

So I'm just going to remove this and we will leave the volume claim template section here.

Let's fix that.

This should be a little bit better aligned.

So just make sure that it is aligned to the template section like so right.

So we have selector template and then volume claim templates.

And this is a list of objects where we will specify once again metadata and specifications.

Right.

So metadata and spec and very similar to how we bring the pod definition here.

We actually also bring persistent volume claim definitions here.

So the metadata will be let's say here the name is going to be Local storage.

And the specification here will be access modes.

So we're just going to specify that we want to create a volume claim template that has a read write

once, like so.

So let's copy the read write once.

Let's come here, let's paste it here.

And the storage class name here.

Storage class name.

It will also be from our persistent volumes.

That's going to be the local storage.

So let's copy this and paste it here.

And then we will also have resources requests.

And then we'll say storage.

And that's going to be I believe that we are using 128 Mebibytes.

Right.

So let's just copy this and let's paste it here.

And as you can see this is very similar to what we have defined here.

The only exception is that we are not creating this volume mode.

We are just leaving it out.

So let's now remove this persistent volume claim because we don't need it anymore.

And we also don't need the pod anymore.

Now you might be wondering what happens actually with this name of local storage here.

And actually, this is the name that we should match our name of the volume mounts here.

So maybe this is getting a little bit confusing with the storage class name I will just update to match

actually the name that we already have defined in our volume mounts.

In this case here, whenever we are creating a stateful set, we don't need to specify the volumes section

under the pod template.

This is very important because before when we were working solely with persistent volumes and persistent

volume claims, we would also specify a volumes definition here in on the same level as the containers

in the Pod specification.

But with stateful sets, we don't need to do that.

Kubernetes will manage behind the scenes, and it will create the necessary volume definitions in our

pods, and they will match this metadata.

This name here in the metadata we can also add multiple volume claim templates.

If we wish to have multiple persistent volumes mounted in our container, then there is nothing that

is stopping us from adding a second one.

So you could very well come here, create a second one and then change the name to Local volume two,

for example.

And then we could also create a second volume mount by just copying this here and then pasting it here.

Local volume two Mount local two for example.

This is perfectly fine.

So we can also mount persistent storage from different sources, and we can use that inside of our container

for now.

I think that this definition here is already getting a little bit confusing enough, so I'm not going

to go into any other types of customizations here, but if you go through the documentation, then you

would also see that there are other ways that we can customize our stateful set.

Let's save our files and let's now come back to the terminal here, and let's now apply our stateful

set file like so.

And you will see that the demo stateful set will be created.

So now we can get our pods here.

And you will see that instead of having a random string in the end here they actually have very stable

IDs.

So we have the ID zero, the ID one here.

And as you can see, if we have a look at the age, we can see that the one with ID zero has been created

before, the one with ID one.

And the stateful set also makes sure that this pod here gets the.

So the first pod, or let's say the previous pod gets into a healthy state before creating the next

pod.

We can also have a look at the stateful set.

So kubectl get stateful set.

I'm not sure whether this has a shorthand.

I don't know if SS stands for stateful set.

No it doesn't.

But we could also describe then the stateful set and have a look at its configuration if we have a look

at the persistent volumes.

So let's just clear here.

Have a look at the persistent volumes.

We will see that we have two volumes which are bound and still a third one which is available.

If we were to now have a look at the persistent volume claims, we will see there are two persistent

volume claims and they follow the same principle here.

So local volume stands for the name of the persistent volume claim that we have specified here in the

template.

That is the name.

In addition to that, Kubernetes is appending here the name of the stateful set.

So demo stateful set.

And then it's also appending an index here.

And you can see that this is actually bound to the stateful set zero.

Stateful set one.

And these are the volumes.

Right.

So these are actually not the stateful set pods but the volumes that we have created.

You can also identify this match here on the top.

Now if we were to actually delete a pod.

So let's get the pods here and let's now try kubectl delete pod demo ss zero.

And the moment we do that it will take a little bit of time.

Let me add here the force.

Once again let's have a look.

That's looking good.

And now if I were to get the pods once again we will see that the pod was recreated with exactly the

same index in comparison to deployments.

This was not really possible.

So the the suffix here that was appended by deployments was a random string.

That means if pods were recreated, they would get a new random string at the end of them.

With Statefulsets, it is possible to have this in a more stable situation or scenario, and that has

its own use cases.

So let's now exec into let's clear this.

Let's now exec into one of the spots.

So exec it and the name of the pod we're going to go with demo SS S0.

And what we want to execute here is the shell command.

That's perfect.

So we have mounted our volume under the forward slash mount forward slash local directory.

So let's just echo something here.

Echo hello from SS zero or from demo statefulset zero.

And we're gonna write this to Mount local.

Hello dot TXT.

All right.

So now we have the file here.

Let's exit.

And if we were to now execute once again into this pod and just get the contents of the file.

So let's just copy this here and let's paste it here.

We will get hello from demo Statefulset zero.

If we were to now exec into the second pod that was created by this statefulset, and we were to try

to actually print the results here, we will see that it's not possible.

Right.

So the persistent volumes, they are mounted once again under different directories.

That was a conscious choice that we did here.

So they don't really share the underlying directory.

Right.

That means the data here from our first pod is or actually from our first pod here is written under

SS zero, while the data from our second pod will be written under SS one.

So we cannot retrieve this data here.

Let's exit.

And let's now delete once again our pod with or the pod SS zero here.

And let's have a look at what happens once that pod is recreated.

So the pod was recreated here.

And we can now exec into this pod once again.

And if we were to print the contents, oops.

If we were to print the contents of Mount Local hello.txt.

Oops, sorry, I exec into the wrong one here.

I exec into the one.

Okay, I was wondering what what kind of mistake I did, but that that was just the name of the pod.

Apologies for that.

Let's exec into the one with zero here.

And now let's get the contents of this file.

And.

Perfect.

The file is still available here.

That means the statefulset took care of correctly identifying the correct persistent volume claim to

bind to this pod as well.

And so if we have a look at the persistent volume claims here, we will see that their age didn't change.

So the persistent volume claims were not deleted.

They were kept whenever we deleted the pods.

And then when the pods were recreated, Kubernetes was smart enough to identify that this claim actually

should be connected to our SS zero or demo SS zero pod here, and that's how we can get our pods to

have a stable storage behind the scenes.

Awesome.

So hopefully this helps understanding a little bit more how the persistent volumes and stateful sets

work with each other.

And I believe that's a great moment for us to take a short break and let's come back in the next lecture.


Now that we know how to work with stateful sets and statically provisioned volumes, remember we did

create persistent volumes here manually by using the local volume type.

And we had yes, to enter into minikube, create these different directories here and set everything

up so that this would work as expected.

We can now experiment transitioning from the statically provisioned persistent volumes to the dynamically

provisioned persistent volumes.

And as you might have guessed, this is a very simple migration in our stateful set file.

All that it requires is to either comment out this or completely remove this line.

Here we can remove that like so, or we can just change the storage class name to standard.

I do prefer to keep the storage class name here explicitly mentioned for the very simple reason that

if we do not include that and then we change which storage class is default behind the scenes, then

there might be unexpected behavior here.

So if we just fix the storage class name, then we can rest assured that the storage class that will

always be used is the one with the name standard.

So just to confirm here, this standard name is the name of the storage class.

It is not the fact that it's set as default, and the fact that it's set as a default is represented

by this default here next to its name.

Right.

So now if we use this storage class name, then the persistent volume claims they will lead to the creation

of the underlying persistent volumes.

So all we have to do here and just make sure that you are inside of the same folder Statefulsets.

Let's apply then the stateful set file.

The moment we do that, Kubernetes will want to create two replicas, right?

So remember here that we have two replicas.

They are now up and running.

That's all good.

And now let's get our persistent volume claims.

And we see that we get two persistent volume claims.

The names of our persistent volume claims they are composite.

So this is the metadata dot name key that is coming from here.

And then we also have the pod name here.

And this stable index at the end of the pod name is really what allows Kubernetes to also identify that,

hey, if the pod called demo stateful set one is recreated, then we will link this persistent volume

claim here with the pod.

Right.

So just to clarify if we were to describe our pod.

So let's describe the pod demo dash S0 like so.

Then we will see that under our volumes here the local volume is the name of the volume.

The type is persistent volume claim.

The claim name is this one.

And this is then behind the scenes.

This persistent volume claim is bound to a persistent volume that was dynamically created for us.

Let's clear the screen here.

And now we can also SSH into minikube.

So let's SSH into minikube here.

And then we can confirm also that the folders under our host path default were created successfully.

We have the two folders, one for each of the persistent volumes, and we can then start persisting

data.

Another important aspect here is that when we delete a stateful set.

So let's just delete our stateful set once again.

Then the persistent volumes and the persistent volume claims they are not deleted.

Right.

So kubectl get persistent volume claim they remain alive and they are still bound to the underlying

to the same underlying persistent volumes.

And this makes sense because stateful sets they are by definition stateful applications.

And if we were to emit or if Kubernetes were to immediately delete our persistent volume claims and

the underlying persistent volumes, then we would basically just lose this data, right?

So we can definitely delete them manually so we can delete them with the kubectl delete persistent volume

claim.

And then we can pass the name here.

Or we can also pass the Al flag like so to delete both persistent volume claims.

We can do the same with our volumes.

So kubectl delete persistent volumes all and hear the persistent volumes.

They were automatically removed because that is the reclaim policy that is set in our storage class

standard.

Right.

So if we have a look here let's describe our here.

Perfect.

The reclaim policy is already here.

So that's the delete reclaim policy.

That's great.

So we have migrated our stateful set to working with dynamically provisioned persistent volumes.

Another nice migration here for us to practice a little bit more and explore a little bit more the functionality

of Kubernetes and of minikube.

Let's come back here to the IDE.

I just want to make sure that the directory is inside of minikube are deleted, and sometimes they are

not.

So the cleanup sometimes doesn't happen.

And let's have a look.

Whether they were removed perfect.

They were removed.

So we are good to go.

Let's then take a short break and I'll see you in the next lecture.




Let's discuss headless services, why they are useful, and how we can couple them or use them together

with stateful sets to provide a stable DNS identity.

DNS entry for our stateful set pods.

The definition of a headless service is very similar to any other service that we have created.

So let's just create a new file here.

We'll call service dot YAML like so.

And then here we will define the API version that's going to be v1.

The kind will be service metadata.

And this is important that we keep in mind the name of the service here is is important.

We need to inform this also in our stateful set file.

So let's just choose this.

We're going to call this color service like so.

And then the specifications we will redirect traffic on the port 80.

Target port here will also be 80.

And let's then define here our selector.

And the selector will just use the app label with the color API value.

So far this is pretty much the Or.

Actually this is a cluster IP service, right?

So this is the definition for a cluster IP service.

To make this service headless, all we have to do is to add a cluster IP option here and set this to

none.

It's important that the IP is both in uppercase.

And the non here is not the equivalent of not setting the option.

This is a special string in Kubernetes and it reveals or it signals the intention of creating a headless

service.

So we've been talking headless service.

Headless service.

What is the difference.

Well what a headless service does.

The difference is that it does not have a cluster IP assigned to it.

So it does not provide any load balancing.

And we cannot talk to it via its cluster IP because it doesn't have one, nor via just its name.

So the whole point of a headless service is to actually just provide a stable DNS entry that we can

use to talk to specific pods.

This, as you might imagine, is very useful in the context of stateful sets because our pods, they

are supposed to have state, right?

So let's now just apply here our service like so, and we will see that we have the color service created

here.

Let's then get our services and we will see that there is no cluster IP here.

If we were to now describe the service color service like so, we will see that there are no end points.

So this is useful or it's useful for us to talk to specific pods primarily in the context of stateful

sets.

You can think of a stateful set as maybe a database application.

And then our data is saved in a specific pod.

And we want to talk directly to that pod.

The default load balancing that cluster IP and node port services provide.

It makes that virtually impossible because the load or the traffic is redirected to different pods every

time we hit the service.

and that's where headless services come into play.

They enable us to talk to specific pods via their pod names.

So let's create our stateful set here.

And I do apologize for using the color API application.

Once again, the color API application is not a stateful application, but it will enable us to visualize

this talking to specific pods behind the scenes a little bit later on in the course, we will also implement

a MongoDB database in Kubernetes, and we will use stateful sets and headless services.

We'll practice this once again and there we will see the difference or the behavior of talking to different

pods whenever they have different data.

So let's just explore here the behavior rather than ensuring that we are working with a directly stateful

application here.

So the kind is going to be stateful set.

We're going to call this the color stateful set like so um and let's remove here the error here.

And the selector match labels.

That's going to be color API like so.

Let's also add the name here and the name here as well.

And let's then change the image to use our LM Academy image or whatever username you're using here.

Call the API and the version is 1.2.1.

We can leave the volume amount here with W-w-w.

Or we can actually just change this to dummy data because once again, we don't really have any stateful

data in our application.

Let's just change this to temp data like so.

And here we have the metadata.

That's good.

The specification access mode read write once and let's then set the storage class name like so.

And this will be the standard class name the standard storage class.

This is already, as already mentioned coming by default with minikube.

And it does allow dynamic provisioning of Hostpath volume types.

So let's see whether there is anything else we need to update.

Yes, there is the service name here.

As I mentioned before, the service name it must match the service here.

So if these names don't match then this is not going to work.

So just add the color service here as the service name.

And let's increase this replicas to three.

Right.

So this is not going to make any difference for us.

Now I just want to have three replicas here for us to experiment with.

So let's scroll down a little bit.

And I believe that everything is looking good here.

Let's save this.

Let's now come back to the terminal.

Let's clear the screen and let's run kubectl apply color statefulset like so.

We can also watch the creation of the of the pods.

So let's see if the pods are already created.

Now we have just one here.

Perfect container creating running.

Then we see that the second one is created.

And now the third one will be created.

Perfect.

So we have our three pods here if we were to now describe our service.

So let's describe our service once again we will see that we have three endpoints here.

The pods were already registered with the service and we should be able to reach them by name.

So now the name of the pods are color Statefulset or SS here.

And then zero, one and two.

We don't have any pod that we can SSH into let's or that we can exec into.

Sorry for that.

So let's just create a debug dot YAML pod here.

And the kind will be pod.

And then we can just use here let's say debug like so.

Or actually let's call this curl.

And then here we're going to use our Alpine curl image.

Right.

So let's just use here LM Academy for slash alpine dash curl version 1.0.0.

And this just allows us to quickly run curl commands.

Let's save this.

Let's come back to the terminal.

Let's then apply this new file here the debug file.

And let's confirm that the pod is up and running.

That's perfect.

So now we can exec into this curl pod and run the shell command.

Now we get our terminal.

And let's clear here.

Let's see if we can clear the screen.

Perfect.

So now for us to reach out to our pods in the statefulset.

What we will use here if we are inside of the same namespace is the pod name.

So I'm just going to come back here.

Let's take that's going to be color dash SS-0 and then dot the name of the service.

Let's come here to the service.

That's going to be color SVC like so.

So if we send a curl request to this address here from within the same namespace, as you can see we

will talk directly to the pod color ss zero.

If we were to then also send a request to forward slash API, then we can confirm that this is also

working as expected.

If we were to send a core request now to a second pod, let's say to the dash two here, then we will

be redirected to this Dash two pod.

right?

So as you can see here, we are always being redirected to the same pod.

Let's try to send a core request just to the service itself.

And as you can see, the moment we do this, we are redirected to the first pod.

That's great.

Let's clear the screen.

And we can also use here.

So let's run.

The name will be color ss zero dot color SVC.

And we can also use the fully qualified domain name with the default or dot default dot svc dot cluster

dot local.

That's a very long one.

But this is what we would use if we wanted to talk to a specific pod from a specific stateful set within

another namespace.

It will just change the default here to the namespace name.

And then we would be able to talk to these pods.

And so this is what the headless service is actually doing for us.

It's basically just enabling us to reach out to very specific pods that are backed up by a stateful

set.

Once again, because we are talking about stateful sets, this makes sense, right?

So stateful sets would create stateful pods.

And each pod has a persistent has a stable identity in terms of storage as well.

That means if the first pod gets deleted and recreated, then it will be assigned to the same volume,

claim to the same persistent volume claim, and the same underlying persistent volume.

That means having this stability to reach out to the same pod is a very desirable characteristic.

That's great.

So hopefully the concept of headless services and what they enable us to do is clear.

I just want to make a small comment.

I did run into a couple of bugs when experimenting in different computers, and at times let me clear

here the screen.

At times, whenever I try to just reach out to the pod via the short name like this or color dash SVC.

It has not been always working for me, so sometimes this would not resolve to the actual underlying

pod, but using the fully qualified name domain would.

So I don't know if this is a bug that is somehow present either in Kubernetes or in the core DNS service

that is handling this DNS resolution behind the scenes or in minikube.

I don't know where the source of the bug is, but I just want to inform you in case you come across

this.

Now, another small thing I do tend to create the service before the stateful set, and when I created

things in different orders orders.

Sometimes the service would not register the pods from the stateful set correctly.

Now once again, these are all intermittent things, but I'm just mentioning that in case you run into

this issue.

So if the pods are not identified or not picked up by the service, then try to delete the stateful

set and the service and then recreate first the service and then the stateful set.

If even after that things don't work, then just as always, don't hesitate to use the Q&A section.

More than happy to try to find a solution together with you.

That's great.

So that's it for this short discussion around headless services, let's come back to the terminal and

let's clean up our cluster.

So I'm going to delete with force here.

And I'm just going to delete everything right.

So here this once again is a controlled environment.

So there's no problem for us to delete.

And even so after we do that if you do wish to delete the persistent volumes then you would also have

to do that manually.

So we can delete our persistent volume claims manually.

Here all the three claims will be deleted, and then the persistent volumes should also be deleted behind

the scenes since they are dynamically provisioned.

That's great.

So now we are with a clean state.

Once again, let's take a short break and I'll see you in the next lecture.
